To whom it may concern,

Re: Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation)
Bill 2023

I'm not convinced this is a good idea, a bureaucratic government department that has not been
elected, or an elected governement with bias in control of what is the published truth, as they see it,
without an option of rebuttal in regards to citizens rights with freedom of speech and expression is a
dangerous path to take.

This is straight of of the fictional book 1984, the ministry of truth. This is not the answer, it removes
the option of debate, raising counter arguments to peoples beliefs, positions and ideas. I believe in
the ability to have open communication regardless of where truth lies, where each person has the
opportunity to debate and decide in their own right what the truth is. If we take that away, we will
only be following the defined truth as determined by the government bureaucrats which can apply
any bias as required for the narrative being sold. If this amendment passes each citizens human
rights to express themselves will be diminished based on someone else's perspective or position
being true or false.

Free flowing freedom of speech and expression has led western countries to the where they are
today, it has strengthened them in many ways also being example beacons of freedom in the world.
It angers me that something like this would even be contemplated and raised, I can see this being
abused extensively, no different to a state with a dictatorship. The past three years where there were
many things raised on social media and deemed misinformation, people of reputation and experts in
their fields were shutdown by social media, main stream media, commentators and governments for
voicing theirs views. These peoples speech later being found and proved correct after their
reputations were ruined. Who is going to take responsibility and be accountable for these situations
after the fact, conveniently from what appears in the draft the responsibility of those in control are
deemed to be exempt.

Who is the arbiter of truth?, who decides whats true?, what is the recourse for individuals and
groups accused of falsehoods? Is the evidence of what is deemed true going to be vetted by third
parties outside the government? In regards to science where new observable evidence in contrary to
current knowledge and understanding, will these findings be deemed misinformation?

Some of the definitions are ambiguous and open to interpretation, they could easily be linked to
other legal controls currently within the law to enforce an outcome. I would like to see a re-thinking
of this amendment, I get that misinformation can have adverse affects in society, but in silencing
what could be credible information it may lead to more destructive outcomes.

Regards,

Rowan Howard

2/7/2023


-----

