Submission on the proposed Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and
Disinformation) Bill 2023.

Firstly, I appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback on the amendment bill and do hope the
intentions are sincere in allowing it.
All feedback from the public should be treated with respect, without prejudice against the authors and
genuinely taken into account when deliberating on the next steps re. the bill.

Perplexingly, the ‘facts sheet' relating to this bill (posted on the government website’s infrastructure page)
claims that the ACMA ‘will have no role in determining truthfulness’.. Which sounds promising in the
interests of free speech and discussion, however upon reading the entire 64 page bill, this statement
appears more and more bizarre as written in no part of the entire proposed bill is there in fact any
mention of a body or organisation of sorts that would actually attempt to fill the shoes of the all knowing
universe, and act as some paramount arbiter or ministry of truth.. That is of course (in complete
contradiction to the governments ‘facts’), for the ACMA themselves.

They claim to want to simply work along side ‘bodies or associations’ that already moderate and censor
content on different online platforms. The ever unreliable ‘fact checkers’ etc. we’re so familiar with come
to mind. However, they afford themselves the privilege of clamping down on these groups or even
online platforms themselves whenever they may feel the need, with new or amended ‘codes’ or
‘standards’ of conduct to be enforced alongside the threat of hefty legal ramifications for failing to
comply.

Included in the legislation is of course, a convenient exemption to these rules allowed for certain outlets
of information..
‘Professional news content’ or ‘Educational content’ that has been pre accredited/approved and
authorised by the state or commonwealth government. Basically, the mainstream media is exempt from
the omnipotent judgement of the ACMA online.

According to the ACMA, the same information, ‘news’ from any/every TV or radio station is completely
veracious and deserves no critique.
As an intelligent population, we know of course of this fallacy. The idea that government and
government authorised corporate news would never mis or disinform the public is a myth still held as true
by only the most disengaged, often indoctrinated and gullible amongst the population.

Reviewing past decades, and ongoing into the present/future, one could compile literally an infinite list of
claims made by these sources as being true that in reality equate to either mis or disinformation.
If the last few years in particular have taught the broader community (and not just proactive independent
researchers) anything, it’s that this so called ‘professional news content’ etc. cannot be trusted.

Millions of people now suffer with severe physical adverse reactions, financial duress and many even
with the loss of loved ones after the impacts of the emergency measures and health directives taken or
made by government. Lockdowns and work/civil rights restrictions destroyed livelihoods, and people
were willingly or coercively injected multiple times with what was promoted vigorously through
‘professional news outlets’ not only as a ‘safe and effective vaccine’, but an absolute necessity to protect
themselves and others against a supposed deadly virus.

While many at the time were rightfully skeptical of these claims and measures taken, and shared
legitimate concerns and information contradicting the government/corporate narrative online through
text/video etc. on social media and other outlets, the information proving their concerns as valid and
completely righteous was brandished as mis/disinformation and often censored.

A relatively short while later, we find these claims from government/corporate news outlets and the
necessity of past actions taken from the government that were based on such claims, have been
retracted, proven and admitted as being false or unnecessary. However no amount of admission can
rectify the reality of the damage done to such victims of this period of mass media driven hysteria and


-----

disinformation.

Subsection 7(1 )(d) of the bill defines misinformation as content on the digital platform that is ‘reasonably
likely to cause or contribute to serious harm'.
Subsection 7(2)(e) defines disinformation as the above but ‘the person disseminating, or causing the
dissemination of, the content intends that the content deceive another person’.
Harm is defined in 6 categories 2 of which are rightfully included as ‘harm to the health of Australians’
and ‘economic or financial harm to Australians, the Australian economy or a sector of the Australian
economy’.

One can fairly conclude given these definitions, that the government and associated media (exempt from
the proposed legislation) are in fact themselves guilty of disseminating misinformation and even
disinformation to the public, causing harm.
The obvious question arises as to why a double standard should exist, and these outlets should be
exempt from such laws.

Luckily, subsection 45(a) declares that before determining a standard in this division (division 5          -
Misinformation standards), the ACMA must consider ‘whether the standard would burden freedom of
political communication’. This of course being an important, balanced and necessary inclusion in such a
proposal.. However one line below this statement, 45(b) reads ‘if so, whether the burden would be
reasonable and not excessive, having regard to any circumstances the ACMA considers relevant’. The
broad, vague and typical conjecture often seen in this style of proposed legislation is rife, and this line
may easily be interpreted as such that the ACMA wishes to grant itself the right to decide what political
communication, and to what extent, is acceptable.

The Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation Bill 2023 is an attempt by the Labor government
along side the ACMA to further over reach into the already mass regulated realm of online
communication and further determine the spread or silencing of information as deemed acceptable by
the state.

A healthy functioning society and democracy needs to acknowledge the importance of, and protect the
most important human/civil right of freedom of speech for all.

The bill asserts to combat what is described as harmful online content however the question of ‘harmful
to whom’ looms largely. On the surface, the idea of combatting mis/disinformation may seem
unambiguous and honourable and it is presented in such a way. However, basic analysis of the content
proposed reveals it amounts to nothing more than than an effort to increase the scourge of online
censorship and protect those people or groups from criticism who are most deserving of it.

Misinformation and disinformation will be effectively exposed and disposed of naturally through open
criticism, discussion and debate and most certainly not by the opinion of a government organisation.

The idea that any singular group or more precisely, a government organisation (the ACMA for example)
can claim to know and declare what is or isn’t mis/disinformation is ludicrous. The judgement of the
ACMA is quite simply hindered by its alignment to following certain agenda driven guidelines and terms
of reference. At best, all the ACMA can do is provide its opinion on what it believes to be true or not.

If in a world where this kind of law must exist, the bill should be amended to include all government
approved and ‘professional news’ outlets, and the determination of what constitutes ‘misinformation or
disinformation’ be decided upon by a truly independent, large, balanced, public body of citizens void of
any one sided/majority political or financial conflict of interest.

Better yet, the bill should be scrapped entirely as the idea of any group people determining ‘truth’ without
the allowance of the open mass spread of information, criticism, debate and communication is lunacy.

CJC


-----

