# Comment on the Proposed New ACMA Powers Regarding Misinformation and Disinformation

My comment about the proposed legislation begins with words of old wisdom: "The TRUTH
does not mind being questioned, and a LIE does not like being challenged". This legislation
allows the government to introduce a narrative, impose it as the absolute truth and forbid
challenges. If the narrative truly is the TRUTH then it would stand firm regardless of any
scientific, philosophical, medical or social scrutiny, however, if the narrative is a LIE then a
single challenge would break it. It is then logical to conclude that censorship of speech would
be required in the situation when the narrative is of questionable nature. The application of this
legislation is obsolete when the narrative is truthful, but it finds purpose when the narrative is
false. It provides a protective shield to LIES, and in the process it criminalises the TRUTH and
penalises truth tellers. Considering that only government agencies are exempt, it clearly
exhibits a law worthy for dictatorships. “It happened” and “it is” exactly as the power of
authority dictates, do not question it, do not investigate it, do not speak and write about it,
otherwise hefty penalties will be served. This has no place in a democratic society.

No further are we to look than the last three years to see how government agencies have
demonstrated peddling of misinformation and disinformation. The statement “safe and
effective covid vaccines" was promoted as the absolute TRUTH; however, when the statement
was subjected to scrutiny it revealed to be a LIE. By the mode of action the "covid vaccines"
are not regular vaccine injections, but are gene therapy products. They do not stop infection
and do not stop transmission so the effectiveness is zero. They can cause debilitating injuries,
hospitalisations and death, therefore are not safe to be administered to healthy people. The
recent US Cleveland Clinic study of 51000 employees found that with each additional dose of
vaccines the COVID-19 infection rate rose. The unvaccinated were the least likely to be
contracting the disease. All those who told the truth from the very beginning were ridiculed as
‘conspiracy theorists’ and misinformation spreaders. They were persecuted and penalised
because they challenged the false narrative.

Freedom of speech to express an opinion by way of critical thinking is a tool the public has to
maintain an honest government. Who would want to take that tool away? Only compromised
entities seek for ways to silence the freedom of speech, to suppress our God given ability to
uncover the truth and our God given responsibility to speak the truth. The first thing that
suffered during this pandemic was the truth, and the truth would have never seen light of day,
were it not for the freedom of speech. This legislation puts the government in the position to
censor the very type of information that establishes their guilt. It is hypocrisy of grave concern;
it removes democratic speech and replaces it with totalitarian censorship.

I cannot imagine of another purpose for introducing totalitarian powers in a democratic society
other then the sole purpose of ensuring that serious misconduct stays hidden.

Concerned Citizen
Robert Ristevski
08/08/2023


-----

