**a** **world** **_of_** **difFerence**

25 August 2023

Information Integrity Section
Platforms and News Branch
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communicationsand the Arts

Via e-mail: information.integrityoinfrastructure.gov.au,

To whom it may concern,

**SBS** **submission** **-** **Communications** **Legislation** **Amendment** **(Combatting** **Misinformation** **and**
**Disinformation)** **Bill** **2023**

SBS appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Communications Legislation Amendment
(Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill2023 (the **Bill),** which would amend the
_Broadcasting_ _Services_ _Act_ _igg2_ **(BSA)** to includes new Schedule 9.

As set out in the Government's consultation materials on the Bill, SBS acknowledges that
misinformation and disinformation pose a threat to the safety and wellbeing of Australians, aswellas
to Australia's democracy, society and economy.

SBS's provision of high-quality public interest journalism and other professionally produced content
in more than 60 Languages, including English, is extremely important in countering misinformation
and disinformation. _SBS_ _News_ is Australia's most trusted news provider,1 supplying high-quality
balanced, and accurate news and information via broadcast television and radio, the SBS website,
SBS On Demand, SBS apps, SBS profiles on social media platforms, and in some cases, via third party
###### distribution such as video content on YouTube or podcasts on Spotify.

Any regulatory reform to address misinformation and disinformation must preserve SBS's
###### independence and integrity, which are the statutory foundations on which SBS's services are
provided. Ensuring SBS's independence and integrity is essential in maintaining audience trust in SBS
###### content in the face of misinformation and disinformation.

Regardless of the platform on which it is published, SBS's content is subject to strict quality control
and safeguard measures set out in the SBS Code of Practice **(SBS** **Code),** which is made underthe
_SpecialBroadcasting_ _Service_ _Act_ _iggi_ **(SBS** **Act)2** The SBS Code sets out the principlesand policies
SBS uses to guide its content to ensure that SBS maintains the highest standards of editorial
###### independence and integrity. It details SBS's obligations regarding matters such as accuracy for factual content, impartiality and balance in our news and current affairs, scheduling of content, advertising and complaints handling. Adjudications underthe SBS Code are made by the

1 The 2023 Digital News Report: Australia by the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism and the University of Canberra N ews
and Media Research Centre found SBS News is the most trusted (equal with ABC News) and least distrusted news brand.

2 Clause 21 provides that the Code applies to content on SBS platforms, including SBS’s own platforms and SBS accounts and
services on third party platforms, including social media platforms.
**Special** **Broadcasting** **Service**
Locked Bag 028, Crows Nest NSW 1585 Australia


-----

```
                     44

```
independent SBS Ombudsman, and there is an escalation pathway to the regulator, the Australian
###### Communicationsand Media Authority(ACMA), forbroadcast content.

SBS content is appropriately regulated underthe SBS Code and there are no justifiable grounds for
SBS content to be made subject to additional, unnecessary regulation underthe amendments
proposed in the Bill.

**_The_** **_Bill_** **_should_** **_not_** **_apply_** **_to_** **_SBS_** **_content_**

SBS acknowledged and supported the work of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission through its Digital Platforms Inquiry and related inquiries, in identifying the issue of harm
arising from misinformation and disinformation. The work of the ACMA, and the industry group, DIGI,
in developing and overseeing the _Australian_ _Code_ _of_ _Practice_ _on_ _Disinformation_ _and_ _Misinformation_ is
also acknowledged.

The policy intent of the Bill is to regulate content, particularly harmful end-user generated
misinformation or disinformation, that is not otherwise subject to any form of meaningful regulation.
The Billseeks to do this by giving the ACMA reserve powers to act, if industry measures to address
misinformation and disinformation are not considered adequate.

The design and merits of the uplift of regulation in this area from self-regulation to co-regulation is a
###### matter for those whose digital platforms host the content that is of concern, principally digital media platforms which allow for users to upload or share content. SBS's own platforms do not allow users to upload comments or user-generated content, and instead focus on providing high quality, reliable public interestjournalism and other professionally produced content.

Given SBS's content is already subject to extensive and effective editorial standards and community
###### feedback mechanisms, there are no grounds forthat content to be subject to the provisions of the
Bill, whetherby design or via unintended effects.

**_Amendments_** **_should_** **_be_** **_made_** **_to_** **_more_** **_clearly_** **_exempt_** **_SBS_** **_content_** **_for_** **_misinformation_** **_purposes_**

Consultation material supporting the exposure draft ofthe Billnotes that the powers it contains
###### would apply to a broad range of digital platform services, including search engines, news
aggregators, instant messaging services, social media, web-forums, dating sites, and online peer-to-
###### peer marketplaces. These are services captured by the definition of‘digital platform service'in clause
4 of proposed Schedule 9 of the BSA.

SBS acknowledges that certain content is ‘excluded content for misinformation purposes', which is
###### defined in clause 2 to include ‘professional news content'and ‘content produced in good faith for the purposes of entertainment, parody or satire'. The definition of‘professional news content'includes
reference to content produced by a news source who is subject to rules of a code of practice
###### mentioned in paragraph 10(1) ofthe SBS Act (this is the provision underwhich the SBS Code is
made)—with comments on these provisions set out below.

However, SBS is concerned that some online services it makes available will be regulated digital
###### platform services underthe Bill because:


-----

## 4
### 7

###### • they may be interpreted to be ‘media sharing services' (being services with the primary function of providing audio-visual content or audio content to end users); and

 • have an interactive element, however innocuous, such as the ability to share content from an SBS platform to a social media platform.3

SBS is also concerned that there is a risk that its content may be regulated content when it appears
on any regulated digital platform service, such as a social media platform Like Facebook (where that
service's primary function is to collate and present content from a range of online sources, such as
SBS, to end-users).

###### Without a clearer exemption for SBS content, the proposed Schedule 9 may require social media platforms to consider whethercontent posted by SBS is excluded content for misinformation
purposes. This is unnecessary given the existing robust content standards that apply to SBS content
###### underthe SBS Code, which are appropriately applied by SBS, and should not be subject ofthe judgement of digital platforms. A clear exemption for SBS content will assist platforms have confidence that accurate and trustworthy SBS news, which is a social good, falls outside the new
regulations.

###### While the definition of‘digital service' in clause 3 excludes services which are broadcasting services, the Bill should be broadened to include a clearer exemption for SBS's digital services from proposed Schedule 9.

An overview of recommended amendments is at **Attachment** **A.** SBS is aware that the commercial
television industry group, Free TV Australia, has proposed specific drafting for amendments to the Bill
###### which encapsulate SBS, as well as its membersand the ABC. SBS supports these recommended
amendments.

SBS thanks the Department for the opportunity to submit in relation to the Bill. Should any queries
arise, please do not hesitate to contact Michael Coonan (SBS Head of Regulatory and Government
Affairs)
# viam

Kind regards,

Clare O'Neil
**Director** **of** **Corporate** **Affairs**

3 For example, userscan share a story from theSBS News website to Facebook and Twitter/X.


-----

## 4
### 7

###### Attachment A

**Overview** **of** **concerns** **and** **recommended** **amendments** **to** **the** **Bill**

**_Concerns_**

Issue Concern

Definition of‘digital        - The currentdefinition ‘digital service' for the purpose of Schedule 9
service' excludes broadcasting services but does not exclude SBS's digital

services.

Definition of‘excluded        - While the definition of‘excluded content for misinformation purposes'
###### content for includes ‘content produced in good faith for the purposes of misinformation entertainment, parody or satire' and ‘professional news content'there
purposes' are concernsthat the definition of these terms is too narrow.

###### • Forexample, ‘good faith' is not defined and is open to interpretation.

 • ‘Entertainment, parody or satire' are Limited categories and would not, for example, include educational content, which should also be
excluded.

###### • The definition of ‘professional news content' relatesonly to news content produced by a news source, and not a program, or segment of a program, produced by an independent production company for
SBS. Even where produced by independent production companies,
this content is already regulated underthe SBS Code and should also
be exempt.

Definition of‘excluded        - Currently, a digital platform service will only be exemptif it isan
###### service for ‘excludedservice for misinformation purposes' (Parts 2 and 3 of misinformation Schedule 9 will not apply where a reLevantservice is an excluded
purposes' service for misinformation purposes).

###### • For the reasons set out below, there is a risk that SBS digital services that have even the most innocuous interactive functions—as well as
SBS profiles and posts on third party digital platforms (such as social
###### media platforms)—will be regulated services.

Definition of‘media        - A ‘media sharing service' is one of four Listed categories in the
sharing service' definition of a ‘digital service' in clause 4.

###### • SBS digital services, such as SBS websites and SBS On Demand, fall within the definition of ‘media sharing service' because their primary function is providing audio-visual content to end-users.

 • An excluded service for misinformation purposes is a ‘media sharing
service that does not have an interactive feature'.

###### • An ‘interactive feature' can, among other things, include a feature which allows end-usersto share content from the digital service with other end-usersof the digital service, and a feature which allows
interaction between users.

###### • While SBS's digital properties do not currently provide for user comments on the SBS platform, there is a risk that they would be


-----

##### 444

###### captured if, in the future, even the most innocuous form interaction
was enabled within the platform.

###### • Furthermore, if SBS's profiles on social media platforms could fall within the definition of 'mediasharing service', then the interactivity available to users on those platforms could mean these services are not excluded services. bringingSBS within the scope ofthe
regulation.

**_Recommended_** **_resolution_** **_to_** **_concerns_**

It is recommended that amendments be made to the Bill to exempt all SBS services and content
###### from being regulated under proposed Schedule 9. SBS supports the specific drafting suggestions proposed by Free TV Australia which would, in overview:

 • Add a new provision defining an ‘Excluded Broadcaster Service'.

 • Specify that a ‘broadcaster’ for the purpose ofthe definition includes the Special Broadcasting
Service Corporation, among other broadcasters.

###### • Amend the definition of ‘digital service' to exempt an ‘Excluded Broadcaster Service'.

 • Exclude services provided by broadcasters, including digital services, and services that are part
of, or accessed through another service, including an online channel or social media account of
###### the broadcaster.

 • Amend the definition of ‘excluded content for misinformation purposes' such that it also applies to content that is available on an Excluded Broadcaster Service, irrespective of whether it is
accessed from that Excluded Broadcaster Service or from any other digital service.

###### • Amend the definition of‘excluded services for misinformation purposes' such that a professional content service is excluded.

 • Amend the definition of ‘news source' to capture circumstances where exempt content is produced for a broadcaster by a third party.

 • Amend the definition of ‘professional news content' with the effect that any professional content regulated by the SBS Code is exempt.


-----

