# Combating Misinformation and Disinformation

Dear Sir / Madam

I’m outlining here my apprehensions and fears on this proposed legislation combating misinformation
and disinformation.

I fear that this legislation will severely curtail an individual’s freedom of speech and freedom to
express an opinion. This could be the “thin edge of the wedge” that will eventually lead to a complete
and total suppression of one’s freedom of speech and freedom of expression.

Who will be the one that will determine what is misinformation or disinformation? Is it going to be the
government, ACMA or some other bureaucracy? Will it be the media or any of a number of social
media platform providers? Irrespective of whom the arbitrator is this entity will have carte blanche
powers in determining what is misinformation and disinformation.

The Covid lockdowns, together with forced wearing of masks and the illegal mandates on forced
vaccinations has provided the government with unprecedented powers. Once we give the government
additional powers over our lives, they will never relinquish it. I’m afraid this proposed legislation is a
way for them to further consolidate their power and to hold on to it.

Despite the constant government rhetoric on wanting to be transparent, the reality is far from it and
this draft legislation is proof of that. The government doesn’t want us to know the truth; they fear the
truth will expose their lies. And what better way to stop that than by curtailing our ability to find the
truth. By giving them the power to define what is truthful and was is not and labelling any dissenting
view or opinion as misinformation or disinformation, we will be letting the government become the
sole arbitrator of what information we can receive.

This will be the beginning of a totalitarian form of government and we will become a fascist nation
ruled by despots. I don’t want that to happen and I hope neither do you.

Respectfully,

Fred_B


-----

