To the Minister for Communications,

Re: Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and
Disinformation) Bill 2023

Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which Australia helped to
draft in 1948 states: “Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive
and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”

Regulating truth on social media will not protect democracy, it will suppress it.

This Bill’s vague definitions of “misinformation” and “disinformation” are open to
interpretation and abuse by those making decisions about that interpretation.
Identifying acts of terrorism, child sexual abuse and violence is one thing but who
decides what constitutes “mis” or “dis” information and what is “harm”?

The fact that the bill explicitly exempts any government communication, at any level
of government, from being considered misinformation or disinformation, shows how
dystopian this law will be, especially following the last three years of Government
misinformation about the safety and effectiveness of the COVID-19 gene therapy
“vaccines”, the censorship of credible scientific and medical information about the
risks of death and serious adverse effects of the COVID-19 injections plus the
“vaccination” coercion, which deprived people of their ability to give informed
consent.

This Bill would not only apply to public health, as we have already witnessed in the
mass-censorship of contrary analysis relating to COVID-19, it would also apply to
other issues, such as, the science underpinning climate change ideology, questions
about high immigration, questions about gender dysphoria as well as the ‘no’
campaign against the voice to Parliament. When the ‘truth’ becomes a subjective
tool, this country would be on a very slippery slope towards fascism.

While the Bill’s penalties won’t apply to individuals, it will enforce a regime of
suppression of any speech on social media that undermines government claims.

We currently think of Australia as a democratic country therefore I disagree with
**giving any Government, Institution or other entity the ability to exercise**
**control over information or ideas.**

This Bill should not be passed.

Regards,

Patricia Abbott
BAppSc - Research Scientist/Virology, MEnv; MAppFin.


-----

-----

