# British Medical Association v Commonwealth

### The case can be found here - http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1949/44.html

[Home] [Databases] [WorldLII] [Search] [Feedback]

### High Court of Australia

**You are here:** AustLII >>Databases >>High Court of Australia >>1949 >>[1949] HCA 44

[Database Search] [Name Search] [Recent Decisions] [Noteup] [Download] [Help]

## British Medical Association v Commonwealth [1949] HCA 44; (1949) 79 CLR 201 (7 October 1949) 

 HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA

BRITISH MEDICAL ASSOCIATION v. THE COMMONWEALTH [1949] HCA 44;

(1949) 79 CLR 201

Constitutional Law (Cth.)

High Court of Australia

Latham C.J.(1), Rich(2), Dixon(3), McTiernan(4), Williams(5) and Webb(6) JJ.

**CATCHWORDS**

Constitutional Law (Cth.) - Powers of Commonwealth Parliament - "Provision of . . . pharmaceutical,
sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of
civil conscription) . . ." - "Provision" of benefits and services - "Civil conscription" - Provision of free
pharmaceutical benefits - Effect of statute - Medical practitioners compelled to write practically all
prescriptions on Commonwealth forms - "Medical service" - Validity of statute - The Constitution (63
& 64 Vict. c. 12), ss. 51 (xxiiiA.), (xxxi.), (xxxix.), 77 (iii.) - Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 (No.
33 of 1947 - No. 26 of 1949), ss. 4 (2), 6, 7, 7A, 8, 11-14, 20 (1) (c), 21, 23 - Pharmaceutical Benefits
Regulations (S.R. 1948 No. 56 - 1949 No. 44).

**HEARING**


-----

Sydney, 1949, August 10-12;
Melbourne, 1949, October 7. 7:10:1949
DEMURRER.

**DECISION**

October 7.
The following written judgments were delivered:LATHAM C.J. Demurrer to a statement of claim in an action in which the Australia (which is
incorporated under the laws of New South Wales) and six medical practitioners resident and
practising in Victoria or New South Wales. Two of these practitioners hold official positions upon the
Federal Council and two others of them are members of the Council. The defendants are the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Commonwealth Director-General of Health, Dr. A. J. Metcalfe, and
Nicholas Edward McKenna, Commonwealth Minister of Health. (at p224)

2. The plaintiffs claim a declaration that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 is
invalid as being beyond the powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth and contrary to
the Constitution of the Commonwealth. They also claim, alternatively, declarations that
particular provisions contained in the Act and certain regulations made under the Act are
invalid, and they seek appropriate injunctions. The defendants have demurred to the
statement of claim, contending that the Act and the regulations are within the powers
respectively of the Commonwealth Parliament and the Governor-General. (at p225)

3. In 1944 the Commonwealth Parliament passed the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1944. In
1945 the validity of the Act was challenged in the case of Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The
Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30; (1945) 71 CLR 237 . The defendants in that action sought to
support the validity of that Act solely by reason of the power of the Commonwealth
Parliament to appropriate and provide for the expenditure of public money. It was held by the
Court that the appropriation power did not extend so far as to provide constitutional
foundation for the Act, and the Act was declared to be invalid. (at p225)

4. In 1946 s. 51 of the Commonwealth Constitution was amended by including within the
subjects with respect to which the Commonwealth Parliament should have power to make
laws: - "(xxiiiA.) The provision of maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child
endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical and
dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription), benefits to students
and family allowances:". (at p225)

5. The defendants contend that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 is valid as being a
law with respect to subjects specified in par. (xxiiiA.) and they support their argument by
particular reference to "pharmaceutical benefits," but also to some extent by reference to
"sickness and hospital benefits" and "medical services". The defendants rely also upon s. 51
(xxxix.) of the Constitution, whereby power is conferred upon the Commonwealth Parliament
to make laws with respect to - "Matters incidental to the execution of any power vested by
this Constitution in the Parliament or in either House thereof, or in the Government of the
Commonwealth, or in the Federal Judicature, or in any department or officer of the
Commonwealth." (at p225)


-----

6. The plaintiffs, on the other hand, contend that the Act and the regulations made under the
Act go beyond the powers conferred upon the Federal Parliament by the constitutional
amendment. The Act (it is contended) relates to the provision of articles which do not fall
within the category of pharmaceutical benefits or any other category mentioned in par.
(xxiiiA). It is argued that the Act seeks to control various matters which are within the
exclusive powers of the States - standards of drugs, sale of poisons, pure food provisions,
hospitals &c. The plaintiffs also argue that there are provisions in the Act and the regulations
which cannot be justified by calling in aid s. 51 (xxxix.) of the Constitution. It is submitted
for the plaintiffs that the Act involves a form of civil conscription of medical practitioners,
and that it is therefore invalid by reason of the prohibition contained in par. (xxiiiA.) of the
authorization of "any form of civil conscription." It is further contended by the State of
Victoria, which was granted leave to intervene, that s. 13 (2A), (2B) and (2C) of the Act,
relating to the suspension or revocation of approval of pharmaceutical chemists, medical
practitioners or hospital authorities under the Act, purports to confer non-judicial power upon
State Courts, and therefore is beyond Federal legislative power. (at p226)

7. I propose in the first place to summarize the statement of claim, then to state the substance
of the Act and the regulations, and to deal with certain grounds upon which the validity of
particular provisions is challenged. I will then examine the constitutional amendment upon
which the defendant relies, and finally consider whether the legislation can be held to be valid
under that amendment. (at p226)

8. Statement of Claim. In an argument upon demurrer the allegations in the challenged
pleading are, for the purposes of the demurrer, assumed to be true, and the question is, in the
case of a demurrer to a statement of claim, whether, if all the allegations in the statement of
claim are taken to be true, it discloses a cause of action so that the plaintiff will, if the
allegations are established as true, be entitled to the relief claimed. The statement of claim
alleges the passing of the Act and the making of the regulations under the Act, and states the
interest of the plaintiff Council, which is a body corporate one of the objects of which is to
advance the general interests of the medical profession in Australia. The interest of the
individual plaintiffs has already been indicated. Uncompounded medicines, medicinal
compounds, medical materials and medical appliances the names or formulae of which are
included or deemed to be included in the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary
prescribed under the Act are referred to in the statement of claim as "formulary
medicaments." Other medicaments &c. are referred to as "extra-formulary medicaments."
Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the statement of claim are as follows: - "9. A large part of the
professional work done by doctors consists of prescribing for the supply to their patients of
such one or more, or such combinations of two or more, of the medicaments comprised in the
following classes as in the opinion of doctors is or are in each case necessary or advisable for
the proper medicinal treatment of the patient: - (a) formulary medicaments; (b) medicaments,
either formulary or extra-formulary, specified to be supplied in the form of a particular trade
mark, brand, make or proprietary equivalent and in no other form; (c) extra-formulary
medicaments consisting of medicinal compounds compounded according to formulae
contained in the Formulary with variations other than those specified by the Regulations as
being permitted variations of those formulae; (d) other extra-formulary medicaments. 10. A
large number of the medicaments prescribed by doctors for supply to patients are formulary
medicaments. No doctor could carry on the practice of his profession with due regard to the
proper medicinal treatment of his patients or at all if he were unable lawfully to prescribe all
formulary medicaments and all medicaments comprised in any other of the abovementioned
classes." In par. 11 it is alleged that substantially all chemists practising their profession


-----

throughout the Commonwealth have applied for and obtained approval under s. 9 (1) of the
Act as pharmaceutical chemists. Paragraph 12 alleges that on the coming into operation of the
provisions of the Act the plaintiff doctors will be substantially prevented from and hindered
in practising and carrying on their professions and hindered in the proper medicinal treatment
of their patients by the requirements of the Act relating to "the writing of prescriptions, the
repeating of prescriptions, the quantities of formulary medicaments that may be prescribed,
the prescription of formulary medicaments in the form of a particular trade mark, brand,
make or proprietary equivalent, and the permitted variations of formulae contained in the
Formulary." (at p227)

9. The plaintiffs claim a declaration that the Act is invalid or, alternatively, that ss. 7, 7A, 8,
11, 14, 21 and 23 of the Act are invalid, and that the following regulations are invalid - regs.
4, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 27, 29, 30, 31 and 34. (at p227)

10. As already stated, the defendants have demurred to the whole of the statement of claim on
the grounds that the Act and regulations are valid. (at p227)

11. The Act. The Act is entitled the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949. Section 4
defines "medical practitioner" as a medical practitioner duly registered or licensed under
Commonwealth or State law, and "pharmaceutical chemist" is defined in a corresponding
manner. (at p227)

12. Section 4 (2) is of importance in the construction of the provisions of the Act. It is in the
following terms: - "In this Act, any reference to the supply, obtaining or receipt of a
pharmaceutical benefit shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be read as a reference to
the supply, obtaining or receipt of that pharmaceutical benefit in accordance with this Act."
Many provisions of the Act refer to the "supply, obtaining or receipt" of a pharmaceutical
benefit. They do not apply merely to the procurement or delivery of a drug or medicine or
appliance not as a benefit under the Act. All the provisions relating to supply, obtaining or
receipt of a pharmaceutical benefit must be construed in the light of s. 4 (2). Thus, for
example, s. 8 provides that a person shall not be entitled to receive a pharmaceutical benefit
from an approved pharmaceutical chemist except upon certain conditions. This provision,
referring as it does to the "receipt" of a pharmaceutical benefit, should be construed as
applying to the receipt of a benefit in accordance with the Act. Thus s. 8 would not prevent
any person from going to a chemist and buying a drug which, if supplied under and in
accordance with the Act, would be a pharmaceutical benefit. When a customer simply made a
purchase from a chemist he would not be receiving "a pharmaceutical benefit in accordance
with this Act," although he might be receiving a drug which was included within the
definition of "pharmaceutical benefits" contained in the Act. So also the chemist would not
be supplying such a benefit. (at p228)

13. Section 6 of the Act is as follows: - "(1) The pharmaceutical benefits referred to in this
Act shall consist of - (a) uncompounded medicines the names of which, and medicinal
compounds the formulae of which, are contained in a prescribed formulary to be known as
the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary; and (b) materials and appliances (not being
uncompounded medicines or medicinal compounds) the names of which are contained in a
prescribed addendum to the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary. (2) The
Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary shall be deemed to include, as a formula, in
addition to the formulae contained therein, each formula so contained with each variation
specified by the regulations as being a permitted variation of that formula." Thus the


-----

pharmaceutical benefits for which the Act provides are (in class (a)) certain medicines and
medicinal compounds, the formulae of which are contained in the prescribed formulary. The
formulary contains a large number of prescriptions which are identified by a code consisting
of letters and numbers. It is alleged in the statement of claim that a large part of a doctor's
professional work consists in prescribing medicaments which are mentioned in the formulary,
and that a doctor would be unable to carry out his practice unless he were able lawfully to
prescribe, inter alia, formulary medicaments. Class (b) of the pharmaceutical benefits referred
to in s. 6 consists of materials and appliances (other than uncompounded medicines or
medicinal compounds) the names of which are contained in the prescribed addendum to the
Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary. (at p229)

14. Section 6 (2) provides that the formulary shall be deemed to include certain specified
permitted variations of the formulae. These provisions are attacked on the ground that they
are so wide that any material or appliance whatever could be added to the formulary and that
any variation could be made in the formulae. It would be possible, according to this
argument, to add beer and cosmetics to the formulary or any other goods whatever - articles
which might have no relation to the treatment of human ailments and which therefore could
not properly be called pharmaceutical benefits. (at p229)

15. Section 6, however, must be read with the rest of the Act, and other provisions, especially
s. 8 (1) (b), show that pharmaceutical benefits can be supplied and obtained in accordance
with the Act only upon the prescription of a duly qualified medical practitioner. Accordingly,
s. 6 does not have the effect of enabling the Governor-General to include in the formulary, or
the addendum thereto, any article or thing whatever so as to entitle persons to receive it under
the Act irrespective of the treatment of patients by means of drugs &c. The objection
mentioned which has been taken to these provisions should therefore not succeed. (at p229)

16. It is further contended, however, that materials and appliances which are not either
uncompounded medicines or medicinal compounds (see s. 6 (1) (b)) cannot possibly be
regarded as pharmaceutical articles. "Pharmaceutical" is defined in the Oxford English
Dictionary as "Pertaining to or engaged in pharmacy; relating to the preparation, use, or sale
of medicinal drugs," and "pharmacy" is defined in what is described as "the leading current
sense" as "The art or practice of collecting, preparing, and dispensing drugs, esp. medicinally
the compounding of medicines; the occupation of a druggist or pharmaceutical chemist." (at
p229)

17. It would be possible under s. 6 (1) (b) to prescribe in the addendum of the
Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary such articles as trusses and syringes. Indeed, eye
droppers, insulin syringes, bandages and other materials or appliances are now included in
the addendum to the formulary. In my opinion these articles cannot be described as drugs or
medicines and are accordingly not pharmaceutical in character. Legislation for the provision
of them therefore cannot be supported under the power conferred by s. 51 (xxiiiA.) to make
laws with respect to pharmaceutical benefits. But par. (xxiiiA.) also provides that laws may
be made with respect to the provision of sickness and hospital benefits. In my opinion where
the use of a syringe is necessary for the treatment of a disease, or some other appliance is
required either to treat or to remedy some physical incapacity, the provision of such an article
may properly be described as the provision of a "sickness benefit." I see no reason why these
words should be limited to the payment of money during a period of sickness, which is the
common form of friendly society sickness benefit. The provision of a necessary instrument or
appliance for the treatment of sickness, treating the word "sickness" as including any form of


-----

ill-health or incapacity, is in my opinion the provision of a sickness benefit. Accordingly, I
am of opinion that the arguments mentioned which have been adduced against the validity of
s. 6 should not be accepted. (at p230)

18. Section 7 (1) of the Act provides that, subject to the Act and except as prescribed, "every
person (not being a patient occupying a bed in a public ward in a public hospital) ordinarily
resident in the Commonwealth shall be entitled to receive pharmaceutical benefits." Section 7
(2) provides that, subject to sub-s. (4) (a special provision for special charges in prescribed
cases) "a person receiving a pharmaceutical benefit shall not be under any obligation to make
any payment therefor to the person supplying the pharmaceutical benefit." These provisions
entitle any person ordinarily resident in the Commonwealth to obtain pharmaceutical benefits
gratuitously. Section 14 provides that the Commonwealth shall pay the chemist or doctor for
pharmaceutical benefits supplied. (at p230)

19. It has been argued for the plaintiffs that s. 7 (2) is a provision affecting the general law in
such a way as to produce the result that a person who receives from any other person any of
the drugs or medicines &c. specified in the formulary or the addendum could not be required
to pay for them, even though he had purported to buy them and had expressly or impliedly
promised to pay for them. In my opinion s. 4 (2) provides an answer to this criticism. Section
7 (2) applies only to "a person receiving a pharmaceutical benefit," that is to say, (by reason
of s. 4 (2)) receiving "a pharmaceutical benefit in accordance with this Act." If a resident of
the Commonwealth went into a chemist's shop (whether the chemist was a chemist approved
under the Act or not) and purchased a drug which was mentioned in the formulary, he would
not be receiving a pharmaceutical benefit in accordance with the Act, and s. 7 (2) would not
operate so as to relieve him of the duty of paying for it. (at p231)

20. Section 7 (2) is complemented by s. 7 (3), which provides that (subject to sub-s. (4)) an
approved pharmaceutical chemist shall not demand or receive a payment (other than a
payment from the Commonwealth) or other valuable consideration in respect of the supply of
a pharmaceutical benefit. This provision was attacked by the arguments which have already
been mentioned in connection with s. 7 (2). It was argued that s. 7 (3) amounted to a
provision in the general law that chemists should not demand any payment for any of the
drugs mentioned in the formulary. But s. 7 (3) only applies in respect to "the supply of a
pharmaceutical benefit," that is (by reason of s. 4 (2)) the supply of a pharmaceutical benefit
in accordance with the Act. An ordinary sale by a chemist to a customer is not a supply of a
pharmaceutical benefit under the Act. (at p231)

21. If s. 7 were construed in accordance with the plaintiffs' contention, I would be of opinion
that it was invalid, because a power to make laws with respect to the provision by the
Commonwealth (as I interpret s. 51 (xxiiiA.) for reasons to be stated) of drugs& c. would not
authorize the Parliament to control the sale of drugs &c. or to prevent any member of the
public from buying or selling drugs &c. (at p231)

22. Section 7A (1) was inserted by the amending Act No. 8 of 1949. Act No. 26 of 1949
repealed s. 7A as it then stood and inserted the section as it now appears, that is, with the
addition of sub-s. (2), which provides a means of escape from the otherwise absolute
provision of sub-s. (1). Section 7A is as follows: - "(1) Subject to this section, a medical
practitioner shall not write, in respect of a person entitled to receive pharmaceutical benefits,
a prescription for - (a) an uncompounded medicine the name of which, or a medicinal
compound the formula of which, is contained, or is deemed to be included, in the


-----

Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary; or (b) a material or appliance the name of which
is contained in the prescribed addendum to the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary,
otherwise than on a prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth for the purposes of this
Act. Penalty: Fifty pounds. (2) The last preceding sub-section shall not apply - (a) in any case
in which the person in respect of whom, or at whose request, the prescription is written
requests the medical practitioner not to write the prescription on a prescription form supplied
by the Commonwealth for the purposes of this Act; or (b) in such other cases or
circumstances as are prescribed." (at p231)

23. Section 7A (1) imposes a penalty on any medical practitioner who writes a prescription
for a medicine the formula of which is contained in the formulary, or for any material or
appliance &c. the name of which is contained in the addendum otherwise than on a
prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth. The statement of claim alleges that a very
large number of ordinary prescriptions are contained in the formulary. It would therefore be
an offence for a doctor to write otherwise than on a Commonwealth form a large number of
prescriptions which he would require for his patients in the course of treatment if he carried
on practice. (at p232)

24. Section 7A (2) provides an exception to the obligation imposed upon the doctor by s. 7A
(1). The doctor is not bound to write the prescription on the Commonwealth form if the
person in respect of whom or at whose request the prescription is written requests the medical
practitioner not to write the prescription on the Commonwealth form. The effect of this
provision is that a patient or certain other persons may relieve the doctor from the duty of
writing the prescription on the commonwealth form. The result will then be that the patient or
other person will pay the chemist in the ordinary way for making up the prescription and will
not get his medicine free. It will depend entirely upon the patient or other person whether he
requests the doctor not to use the Commonwealth form. Therefore the position created by the
statute is that the doctor is bound to write upon a Commonwealth form a large number,
possibly nearly all, of the prescriptions which he uses, except where a condition is satisfied
which it is not within the power of the doctor to control or to fulfil, namely a request by the
patient or the other person that the doctor shall not write the prescription upon the
Commonwealth form. Thus the legislation has the effect of compelling doctors to write
practically all their prescriptions upon Commonwealth official forms and not otherwise,
although, as s. 7A (2) (b) provides, other exceptions may be prescribed. (at p232)

25. It was pointed out in argument for the plaintiffs and the intervening State that some
persons in respect of whom a prescription was written might be incapable of requesting the
medical practitioner not to write the prescription on a Commonwealth form by reason of
infancy or extreme old age, lunacy or sickness, or diminished or destroyed control of
faculties. It is true that sub-s. (2) of s. 7A would not become applicable in some such cases.
The only result, however, would be that the doctor would write the prescription on a
Commonwealth form and that the pharmaceutical benefit could be obtained for the patient
gratuitously upon presentation to an approved chemist. This fact does not lead to any
conclusion adverse to the validity of the Act. It shows only that what might be called the
power of a patient to excuse a doctor from writing a prescription on a Commonwealth form
does not exist in some cases. In other words, the exceptions from the application of s. 7A (1)
are not as wide as might at first be thought to be the case. But this fact simply leaves for
consideration the validity of s. 7A (1) in its application to the cases - probably the vast
majority of cases - in which, according to its terms, it would be applicable. (at p233)


-----

26. A further criticism of s. 7A (2) was that where a patient was incapable of making a
request it could not be said that the patient wanted the benefit, but only that in the opinion of
the doctor he needed it. It was suggested that in such a case the provision of the alleged
benefit would not be a real benefit, and that therefore the provision for the supply of such an
alleged but not real benefit was outside the power to make laws with respect to the provision
of pharmaceutical or other benefits. An answer to this contention is to be found in the fact
that no pharmaceutical benefit can be provided under the Act except in accordance with the
prescription of a legally qualified medical practitioner. It is in my opinion quite reasonable
for Parliament to accept the opinion of the doctor treating a patient with respect to the drugs
and medicines &c. which will be beneficial in the treatment of that patient. It is difficult
indeed to think of any provision which would be likely to be more effectual in providing that
the free distribution of medicine should do good and not harm. (at p233)

27. It will be necessary to consider the effect of s. 7A with particular reference to the
provision contained in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution with respect to civil conscription. It
is contended for the plaintiffs that s. 7A compels doctors to practise their profession in a
particular way, and therefore amounts to a form of civil conscription. These arguments will
be considered in due course. (at p233)

28. Section 8 (1) provides that a person shall not be entitled to receive a pharmaceutical
benefit from an approved pharmaceutical chemist except - "(a) at or from premises in respect
of which that pharmaceutical chemist is for the time being approved; and (b) on presentation
of a prescription written and signed by a medical practitioner and, except as prescribed,
written on a prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth for the purposes of this Act." I
have already stated my opinion as to the meaning of these provisions when read with s. 4 (2).
(at p233)

29. Section 8 (2) contains a provision requiring repeat prescriptions to be authorized in the
handwriting of the medical practitioner on the prescription form. Section 8 (3) provides that
where a pharmaceutical chemist suspects that a prescription written on a Commonwealth
form has not been signed by a medical practitioner or has been forged or fraudulently
obtained, he shall be entitled, before supplying the pharmaceutical benefit specified in the
prescription, to require that there be furnished to him a statement in accordance with the
prescribed form. (at p234)

30. These provisions define the conditions upon which free medicines are to be supplied and
obtained. If they are not complied with, the medicine is not supplied free. But no person is
compelled to comply with the conditions - except in order to get the medicine& c. free if he
so desires. I can see no reason why the Commonwealth Parliament should not make its gifts
dependent upon such conditions. (at p234)

31. Section 9 provides for the approval by the Director-General of pharmaceutical chemists
for the purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits at or from particular premises. Section 9
(5) requires an approved pharmaceutical chemist to display approved signs. (at p234)

32. Section 10 relates to friendly society dispensaries and enables them to be used as a means
for supplying pharmaceutical benefits under the Act. (at p234)

33. Section 11 is in the following terms: - "(1) Where there is no approved pharmaceutical
chemist in a particular area, the Director-General may approve a medical practitioner


-----

practising in that area for the purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits. (2)
Pharmaceutical benefits supplied by a medical practitioner so approved shall be supplied in
accordance with such conditions as are prescribed." (at p234)

34. It was contended by the plaintiffs that this section entitled the Director-General to
approve a medical practitioner for the purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits without
the consent of that practitioner, so that the result would be that the medical practitioner would
be compelled to supply pharmaceutical benefits against his will. This, it was contended, was
a form of civil conscription in relation to medical services which was excluded from
Commonwealth constitutional power by s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution. In my opinion the
initial proposition upon which the argument depends should not be accepted. The provision
that an official may approve a particular person for a particular purpose, in my opinion,
assumes that that person is prepared to act for that purpose. A power to approve persons as
mining engineers, or as tram conductors, could not be construed as a power to compel
persons to act as mining engineers or as tram conductors. (at p234)

35. Section 12 contains provisions with respect to hospitals. It was contended that these and
other provisions interfered with the management by the State of hospitals established by the
State or constituted under State law. This argument was associated with a more general
argument to the effect that the Act in imposing obligations upon doctors and chemists in
relation to the prescribing and sale of drugs and medicines interfered with the operation of
many State laws relating to those subjects in connection with medical practice, veterinary
practice, pharmacy, health, drugs, poisons, patent medicines, sale of goods, hospitals, mental
hygiene, prices &c. Doubtless the Commonwealth scheme would interfere with the
application of many of these laws, but if the Commonwealth Act is an Act which falls within
the terms of s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution, any State law which is inconsistent with it is
subordinate to it, and the Commonwealth law prevails: Constitution, s. 109. It is quite
immaterial that the State law may also be described as a law with respect to medical practice
or health or drugs or poisons or hospitals &c. If the Federal legislation is authorized by the
Federal Constitution, then it prevails over any inconsistent State law. The question to be
determined is whether the statute is within Federal power. It is a wrong approach to this
question to inquire whether the Federal statute, if upheld, would prevent or interfere with the
operation of State statutes. (at p235)

36. Section 13 (1) provides that the Director-General may, for good cause shown in
accordance with the regulations, suspend or revoke his approval of a pharmaceutical chemist,
medical practitioner or hospital authority under the Act, and may at any time remove such
suspension or restore any such approval. Section 13 (2) provides that where there has been a
suspension or revocation of approval the person or hospital affected may appeal to the
Supreme Court of a State or Territory of the Commonwealth. Section 13 (2A) purports to
invest the Supreme Court of each State with Federal jurisdiction to hear and determine
appeals. The Director-General is to be the respondent in any such appeal - s. 13 (2B). Section
13 (2C) provides for the powers of the Supreme Court upon the hearing of an appeal. Orders
made under these powers would be orders of the Supreme Court and would be enforceable as
such. (at p235)

37. It is contended that these provisions purport to confer upon a State Supreme Court power
which is not judicial in character because the provision that the Director-General may "for
good cause shown" suspend or revoke approval is so vague that there can be no criterion
which a Supreme Court could apply in determining whether or not to allow an appeal. It is


-----

therefore said that this section purports to confer upon a Supreme Court what is really an
administrative and not a judicial power, and that therefore the Commonwealth Parliament has
no power to invest a State court with this power. The Constitution, s. 77 (iii.), authorizes the
Parliament to make laws investing any court of a State with Federal jurisdiction. The
jurisdiction which can be vested in a court under this provision is plainly jurisdiction of a
judicial character. That which can be vested in a State court is "judicial power of the
Commonwealth": see Constitution, s. 71, which provides that "The judicial power of the
Commonwealth shall be vested in a Federal Supreme Court . . . and . . . other Federal courts .
. . and in such other courts as it invests with federal jurisdiction." It is only by virtue of this
provision and s. 77 (iii.) that the Commonwealth Parliament can invest a State court with
jurisdiction so that the court becomes bound to exercise it. There is no provision in the
Constitution which enables the Commonwealth Parliament to require State courts to exercise
any form of non-judicial power. (at p236)

38. It is settled that in what is called an "appeal" to a court from an administrative officer or
body the court exercises judicial power in an original, not in an appellate, jurisdiction. Wellknown instances are to be found in Federal law in appeals to a court from the Commissioner
of Patents, the Registrar of Trade Marks, the Commissioner of Taxation and the Board of
Review under various taxation Acts: see Shell Co. of Australia Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner
of Taxation (1931) AC 275, at pp 295, 297, 298; [1930] HCA 41; 44 CLR 530, at pp 542,
544, 545 . (at p236)

39. The objection based on the alleged vagueness of the words "good cause" cannot be
sustained. A successful litigant can be deprived of costs for good cause. A person may be
bound over to be of good behaviour. A tenant may be bound to keep premises in good
tenantable repair. In each case the court interprets the word "good" in relation to the relevant
circumstances - the conduct of the litigant, the behaviour of the person bound over, the
condition and habitability of the premises. In the same way, upon an appeal under s. 13 (2A)
the court would consider the conduct and qualifications of the appellant in relation to the
purposes of the Act. The function of the court would be similar to that of the Supreme Court
of Victoria in an appeal by a medical practitioner from a refusal of registration by the
Medical Board. In Medical Board of Victoria v. Meyer [1937] HCA 47; (1937) 58 CLR 62 it
was held that the Supreme Court was acting in a judicial capacity in hearing and determining
such an appeal. Thus the objections to s. 13 (2), (2A), (2B) and (2C) fail. (at p236)

40. If these provisions were held to be invalid the only result would be that there would be no
appeal from a decision of the Director-General suspending or revoking approval of a chemist,
doctor or hospital authority - the whole matter would be left to his uncontrolled discretion.
Further, these provisions - which were inserted in the statute by an amending Act - No. 8 of
1949 - are clearly severable from the rest of the Act, and, if they were held to be invalid, the
validity of other provisions would not be affected. (at p237)

41. Section 14 provides for the payment of chemists by the Commonwealth for
pharmaceutical benefits supplied under the Act. The payment is to be made out of public
moneys, and presumably there will be some official check upon payments. Any checking of
payments would involve the examination of a large number of prescriptions, even if it were
thought not to be necessary to examine all prescriptions. If each person ordinarily resident in
the Commonwealth obtained only one prescription a year there would be more than seven
million prescriptions upon which the Commonwealth would make payments - and the
prospect of obtaining medicine for nothing would not tend to diminish the number of


-----

prescriptions. Thus the provision in s. 14 that pharmaceutical chemists shall be entitled to
payment by the Commonwealth in respect of pharmaceutical benefits involves almost
necessarily a system of supplying pharmaceutical benefits which it will be possible to check.
Further reference will be made to this matter at a later stage. (at p237)

42. Section 15 contained a special provision for isolated areas, and s. 16 is as follows: - "The
Minister may, on behalf of the Commonwealth, enter into an agreement (on such terms as to
remuneration, allowances and otherwise as he thinks fit) with a medical practitioner
providing that the services of the medical practitioner shall be available without charge to
members of the public for the purpose of furnishing prescriptions for the purposes of this
Act." Where an agreement is made in pursuance of this section the Commonwealth would
pay the doctor for examining the patient and prescribing, that is to say, s. 16 relates to the
provision of medical services, which is a matter to which s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution
expressly refers. As the services would be rendered in pursuance of an agreement between
the practitioner and the Commonwealth, there could be no objection to this provision upon
the ground that it involved some form of civil conscription. (at p237)

43. Section 20 provides for penalties for making false statements &c. Section 20 (1) (c) was
attacked. It provides that a person shall not "obtain a payment in respect of the supply of a
pharmaceutical benefit which is not payable." It was suggested that this imposed a penalty
upon a chemist who sold to any person a drug or medicine included in the formulary and
obtained payment therefor. I have already given reasons for my opinion that this is not the
case. The challenged provision relates to "the supply of a pharmaceutical benefit." The
ordinary purchase and sale of a drug is not the supply of a pharmaceutical benefit in
accordance with the Act. Accordingly, s. 4 (2) provides the answer to the stated objection. (at
p238)

44. Section 21 confers powers upon certain authorized persons to enter the premises of
approved pharmaceutical chemists or hospital authorities to make an examination or inquiry
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act are being complied with, to
take samples of drugs &c. which may be supplied as, or may be ingredients of,
pharmaceutical benefits, and to examine persons employed in the premises of such chemists
or authorities with respect to any matter under the Act and, further, to exercise such powers
and functions as are prescribed. It was contended that other provisions of the Act are invalid,
and that therefore the provisions of s. 21 exceed the limits of lawful legislative authority.
Section 21 relates to chemists and hospitals and not to doctors. For reasons which I state
hereafter I can see no reason why any of the provisions of the Act which relate only to
chemists and hospitals are invalid, and even if a provision or some of the provisions with
respect to doctors are invalid, that fact would not affect the meaning, though it would limit
the operation, of s. 21. Accordingly, in my opinion s. 21 should not be held to be invalid upon
the grounds suggested. (at p238)

45. Section 23 contains the regulation-making power in the ordinary form - a power to
prescribe all matters which are by the Act required or permitted to be prescribed or which are
necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to the Act - and in
particular "(a) for prescribing the terms and conditions subject to which pharmaceutical
benefits shall be supplied" and certain other matters. If substantial provisions of the Act are
invalid, then the power to make regulations cannot be completely valid - it would not vanish,
but would be limited by relation to such parts of the Act as survived. (at p238)


-----

46. The Regulations. Regulations have been made under the Act - Statutory Rules 1948 No.
56; 1948 No. 155; 1949 No. 44. Regulation 4 prescribes the formulary (see s. 6 (1) (a)) in the
Second Schedule, the addendum to the formulary (see s. 6 (1) (b)) in the Third Schedule and
the permitted variations of the formulae (see s. 6 (2)). (at p238)

47. Regulation 11 provides that where a medical practitioner writes a prescription on a
prescription form he shall indicate the pharmaceutical benefit to be supplied by using the title
thereof as specified in the formulary or addendum, or where he includes a permitted
variation, by using the title specified in the formulary of the formula and setting out the
variation. Other provisions of reg. 11 are as follows: - "(2) A medical practitioner who writes
a prescription on a prescription form shall - (a) write the prescription in duplicate; (b) not
write more than one other prescription on the prescription form; (c) indicate on the
prescription form the date on which he writes the prescription; and (d) draw a line through the
unused portion of the prescription form. (3) A medical practitioner shall not use a
prescription form otherwise than for the writing of a prescription in accordance with, and for
the purposes of, the Act and these Regulations. (4) Where a medical practitioner considers it
necessary to write a prescription but a prescription form is not immediately available for that
purpose, he may write the prescription on any suitable paper if - (a) he indicates on the paper
that a prescription form is not available; and (b) he writes the words 'Pharmaceutical Benefits
Act' at the top of the prescription." Sub-regulation (5) makes further provisions in relation to
the cases mentioned in sub-reg. (4). (at p239)

48. Regulation 11A provides that "The Director-General shall cause supplies of prescription
forms to be available at the offices of the Department of Health in each State or Territory of
the Commonwealth and to be furnished to medical practitioners on request made personally
or by post." It is submitted for the plaintiffs that if s. 7A, requiring the use of Commonwealth
forms, is valid, a doctor could not carry on his practice unless he obtained the forms and used
them in the manner prescribed by reg. 11, and that the statute did not give the doctor any right
to obtain the forms. Regulation 11A imposes on the Director-General a duty to furnish forms,
but I agree that it is at least open to argument whether it confers upon each individual medical
practitioner a right to be supplied with such number of forms as he may ask for from time to
time. But in my opinion these criticisms relate only to the policy and the fairness of the Act
and have no relation to the question of its validity. It may be argued that it is unjust to place
doctors in the position of in effect having to beg for forms so that they are unable to practise
if a clerk in the Commonwealth Health Department fails to send forms to them for any
reason. This criticism, however, is a criticism of the policy of the Act (with which the Court
is not concerned - that is a matter for Parliament and the constituencies), and in my opinion
has nothing to do with the validity of the Act. (at p239)

49. Regulation 15 contains special provisions relating to repeat prescriptions for
pharmaceutical benefits. It was contended that this was really legislation with respect to the
manner of carrying on medical practice and that such an enactment was beyond the power of
the Commonwealth Parliament. In my opinion this objection is met by the provision of s. 4
(2) of the Act. Regulation 15 is limited to the supply of pharmaceutical benefits, and
therefore to the supply of them in accordance with the Act. The Commonwealth Parliament,
in providing for gratuitous pharmaceutical benefits may, in my opinion, provide for the
conditions which are to be satisfied before such benefits are to be supplied. (at p240)

50. Some criticism was directed against reg. 16, which provides that a person shall not be
entitled to obtain an insulin syringe as a pharmaceutical benefit unless he states in writing,


-----

inter alia, that he does not possess a hypodermic syringe and has not been supplied within six
months with a hypodermic syringe. It is pointed out that this provision might leave patients
without a syringe for a substantial period. Such a criticism has nothing to do with the validity
of the regulation. (at p240)

51. A declaration is sought that reg. 17 is invalid. This regulation provides that
pharmaceutical benefits shall not be supplied on presentation of prescriptions more than six
months old. It appears to me that this is a perfectly natural provision which may validly be
included in any scheme for supplying free medicine. The Commonwealth Parliament is under
no obligation to pass a law for providing pharmaceutical benefits. If it does make such a law,
it can make the provision as wide or as narrow as it thinks proper. (at p240)

52. Regulation 18 provides that, save in urgent cases, a person shall not be entitled to receive
a pharmaceutical benefit from an approved pharmaceutical chemist except during the usual
trading hours of the chemist. I can see no reason why it should be said that such a provision is
invalid. It is intended to prevent the lives of chemists being made a burden by being called
upon to supply medicines during non-trading hours by persons who might contend that they
had an absolute right to get them in accordance with Commonwealth statute, and that the
chemist had to supply them at any hour at which they might choose to apply. If the
Commonwealth Parliament thought fit it could limit the supply of free medicines to persons
who applied at a particular specified hour at a particular specified place. In my opinion reg.
18 is a provision which is plainly incidental to the working of a sensible scheme of gratuitous
provision of medicines &c. (at p240)

53. Regulation 23 deals with medical practitioners who have been approved under s. 11 of the
Act and applies to them the provisions which are applicable in the case of an approved
pharmaceutical chemist. I have already referred to and dealt with the contention that s. 11 is
invalid, and, if s. 11 is valid, there can be no objection to reg. 23. (at p241)

54. Regulation 27 provides that where samples are taken under s. 21 the Commonwealth shall
make payment therefor either at rates specified in the Fifth Schedule or, in the case of
ingredients of a benefit, at prevailing retail prices. It is contended that these provisions do not
secure just terms for the acquisition of property, and that therefore they are invalid: see the
Constitution, s. 51 (xxxi.). In my opinion this argument should be rejected. There is no
allegation in the statement of claim which shows that the rates specified in the Fifth Schedule
do not provide ample payment for the articles to which they refer; a prevailing retail price is
obviously a fair price and therefore amounts to just terms in the other cases to which the
regulation applies. (at p241)

55. Regulation 29 imposes a penalty upon persons who obstruct any authorized person in the
execution of his powers under s. 21 of the Act. The validity of this regulation depends upon
the validity of s. 21, which, as already stated, depends upon the validity of the other
provisions of the Act. (at p241)

56. Regulation 31 provides for rates of payment by the Commonwealth to pharmaceutical
chemists and medical practitioners in respect of the supply of pharmaceutical benefits under
the Act. Regulation 31 (2) provides that a chemist shall not be bound to supply a
pharmaceutical benefit in the form of a particular trade mark, brand, make, or proprietary
equivalent, and that if he does supply the benefit in that form, the rate of payment shall
nevertheless be the rate for that pharmaceutical benefit ascertained in accordance with the


-----

regulations unless the Director-General in special circumstances directs that payment shall be
made at a higher rate. This provision is objected to because, in certain cases, as is alleged in
the statement of claim, it is a particular brand or preparation of a drug which is in the opinion
of a medical practitioner necessary for the treatment of the patient, and it is argued that in
some way this regulation prevents the supply of that particular brand or preparation. I do not
so understand the regulation. It means only that in certain cases a person shall not be entitled
under the Act to receive "a pharmaceutical benefit" in a particular form. Such a negative
provision cannot be invalid. It does not infringe any constitutional provision. It merely limits
the benefits which can be obtained under the Act. The Parliament can limit those benefits by
excluding, at will, any particular drugs or medicines from supply under the Act. If the benefit
is supplied in a particular form the rate of payment is to be that set out in the regulations. This
is a reasonable form of protection of the Commonwealth against extravagant over-charge for
proprietary medicines. But there is no provision in the Act which prevents a patient from
buying a drug or medicine at any price which he chooses to pay. (at p242)

57. With respect to reg. 31, an argument for the plaintiffs similar to that put forward in
relation to s. 7A (2) was submitted to the effect that the supply of a pharmaceutical benefit
not of the particular trade mark, brand, make &c. ordered by the doctor might be the reverse
of beneficial to a patient. But reg. 31 (2) does not provide for the substitution of any medicine
for that ordered by the doctor. It provides only that if a medicine in the form of a particular
trade mark &c. is ordered the chemist shall not be bound to supply it, and if he does supply it
he shall supply it at a prescribed price. In other words, this provision reduces the scope of the
benefits available under the Act by providing that in certain cases prescribed medicines shall
not be supplied except for a payment by the Commonwealth at a particular price. This
provision, limiting the benefits obtainable under the Act, cannot be invalid itself and cannot
render invalid any of the positive provisions in the Act which prescribe the benefits which
may lawfully be provided under the Act. (at p242)

58. A claim is made that reg. 34 is invalid. This regulation authorizes the Director-General to
require a person other than a medical practitioner to deliver up any unused forms in his
possession supplied to him by the Commonwealth for the purpose of the Act or the
regulations. No argument was specifically directed against the particular regulation in itself,
but it was assumed that it would be invalid if other provisions relating to the compulsory use
of the forms were invalid. (at p242)

59. The Constitution, s. 51 (xxiiiA.). Under s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution the
Commonwealth Parliament is authorized to make laws with respect to - "The provision of
maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical,
sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services (but not so as to authorize any
form of civil conscription), benefits to students and family allowances." (at p242)

60. Upon this provision the following observations may be made: - (1) The power is not a
power to make laws with respect to, e.g. pharmaceutical benefits and medical services. It is a
power to make laws with respect to the provision of such benefits and services. A power to
make laws with respect to medical services might well be held to be a power which would
authorize a law providing for the complete control of medical services rendered by any
person to any other person and so would enable the legislature to control the practice of the
medical profession completely or to such less extent as Parliament might think proper.
Similarly, if the power were a power to make a law with respect to pharmaceutical benefits it
could be argued (with some doubt because of the eleemosynary suggestion contained in the


-----

word "benefits") that such a power would authorize a law for the complete control of the
business of pharmaceutical chemists. But the actual power is a power to make laws, not with
respect to pharmaceutical benefits or with respect to medical services &c., but with respect to
the provision of such benefits and services. It is accordingly argued that a distinction should
be drawn between powers in the two forms, namely, (1) a power to make laws with respect
to, e.g. pharmaceutical benefits, and (2) a power to make laws with respect to the provision of
pharmaceutical benefits. It is submitted that effect can be given to the introduction of the
words "the provision of" only by treating the power as limited to the provision by the
Commonwealth of the various benefits referred to in par. (xxiiiA.). An analogy may be
suggested between par. (xxiiiA.) and par. (ii.) of s. 51. Under par. (ii.) the Parliament has
power to make laws with respect to taxation. It has always been considered that this is a
power to make laws with respect to taxation by the Commonwealth, and that it would not
authorize Federal laws prescribing the forms or methods of taxation by the States or laws
authorizing private persons to impose taxation. Similarly, it is contended, and in my opinion
rightly contended, that the introduction of the words "The provision of" at the beginning of
par. (xxiiiA.) produces the result that the new power given to the Commonwealth Parliament
by this constitutional amendment is a power to make laws with respect to the providing by
the Commonwealth of the benefits mentioned in the paragraph. Under this paragraph the
Commonwealth Parliament could not make a law requiring States or corporations or
individual persons to provide maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child endowment, or
any other of the benefits specified in the paragraph.
(2) The Act the validity of which is called in question in this case is entitled the
"Pharmaceutical Benefits Act". The defendants, however, in supporting the validity of the
Act, are not limited to defending the Act under the power to make laws with respect to the
provision of pharmaceutical benefits. They may call in aid any other provision of the
Constitution which would authorize any provision in the Act. Thus, as has already been
stated, there may be sickness benefits which are not pharmaceutical in character. If so, and
the Act provides for them, the legislation would be authorized under the heading of sickness
benefits, though not under the heading of pharmaceutical benefits. Similarly, it might be the
case that a particular benefit provided by the Commonwealth under the Act was a medical
service and not a pharmaceutical benefit in the form of some drug or medicine. If so, the
portions of the Act containing such an enactment could be supported under the heading "The
provision of medical services," even although the enactments were contained in a statute
entitled "Pharmaceutical Benefits Act".
(3) If, as I think should be held, it is the case that the constitutional provision contained in
par. (xxiiiA.) relates only to the provision of certain benefits by the Commonwealth, it
follows that under this legislative power the Commonwealth Parliament could not prevent the
provision of such benefits by any other agency, and therefore, for example, could not prevent
the States, through their hospitals or otherwise, supplying benefits either identical with or
different from those which were included within the Commonwealth scheme, as long as the
Federal and State statutes, each positively providing for such benefits, were not inconsistent
with each other. This proposition follows from the view that the legislative power is limited
to the subject of provision by the Commonwealth and that it does not extend to provision by
other agencies or by a private person. But the Act does not in my opinion in any of its
provisions purport to exclude the States from the area of provision of pharmaceutical
benefits. It gives State hospitals and the like and friendly societies organized under State law
the opportunity of taking advantage of the provisions, but it is not the case that they are
bound to do so under penalty of being deprived of necessary medicines &c. There is nothing
in the Act which would prevent a State hospital obtaining and dispensing its own drugs or
which would prevent a friendly society from obtaining and distributing its own drugs and


-----

medicines through a friendly society dispensary. This view depends upon the interpretation of
s. 8 of the Act, which I have already examined. As I have said, in my opinion s. 8 does not
produce the result that the drugs &c. specified in the formulary or the addendum cannot be
obtained from or delivered by an approved pharmaceutical chemist or other chemist except
upon a prescription written upon a Commonwealth form which entitles the recipient to
receive the drugs or medicines without payment. If persons or institutions choose to remain
outside the benefits of the scheme there is not in my opinion anything in the Act to compel
them to accept those benefits. (at p244)

61. Thus, in my opinion, the Act does not in any way assume Commonwealth control of State
institutions such as hospitals &c. It only offers to them an opportunity of coming into the
Commonwealth scheme if they think fit. It may particularly be observed in relation to State
hospitals that s. 12 provides for applications by hospital authorities for approval for the
purposes of the Act in order that pharmaceutical benefits under the Act may be supplied to
patients in a hospital. If a hospital does not apply for approval the Act has no application to it

- but the hospital will not get its medicines free under the Act. Similar considerations apply to
friendly societies by reason of the provisions of s. 10 read together with s. 9.
(4) But, as already stated, if the Commonwealth legislation did affect or control the
operations of State institutions, that fact would not necessarily establish the invalidity of the
Commonwealth legislation. If the Commonwealth legislation is within the legislative power
of the Commonwealth Parliament, then s. 109 of the Constitution brings about the result that
it prevails over any inconsistent State legislation. In this case no such question arises as was
discussed in Melbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth [1947] HCA 26; (1947) 74 CLR
31 - a question as to interference by the Commonwealth with State governmental functions.
(at p245)

62. The Act in relation to the Constitution. The constitutional power is a power to make laws
with respect to the provision of certain benefits, including pharmaceutical, sickness and
hospital benefits and medical services. As far as pharmaceutical benefits (that is, the
provision of drugs &c.) are concerned, provision might have been made for the supply of
drugs and medicines by merely giving them away to all applicants without any precautions to
secure that they were needed by or would be useful to the applicants. It is unlikely, however,
that in the case of drugs and medicines any responsible parliament would adopt such a system
of providing pharmaceutical benefits. The specification of the conditions upon which such
benefits will be provided is part of any legislative scheme for the provision of those benefits;
for example, it would be an obvious part of such a scheme to provide that no such benefit
should be supplied except upon application, and upon application in a particular manner, and
perhaps upon the recipient giving a receipt therefor, which receipt should be in a particular
form. That is to say, some method of administration of the benefits is a part of any scheme for
providing the benefits. (at p245)

63. The Commonwealth could set up a department which would distribute drugs& c., and that
would be an actual means of providing the benefits. But the Commonwealth is not bound to
do this in order to exercise the legislative power. The Commonwealth Parliament can in my
opinion take the position in the community as it finds it, namely that doctors prescribe
medicines by means of prescriptions, and that chemists make the prescriptions up and supply
the medicines &c. to the patients. In order to prevent injury to the public and in order to
secure real benefit for the people, the Parliament can in my opinion impose as a condition of
receiving the benefit that no benefit should be provided under the Act except upon the
prescription of a legally qualified medical practitioner and by a duly qualified pharmaceutical


-----

chemist. All such legislative provisions are an actual part of a system of providing the
benefits referred to in par. (xxiiiA.) of s. 51. They constitute precautions and limitations
within the system itself. (at p246)

64. Under s. 51 (xxxix.) of the Constitution Parliament has power to make laws with respect
to matters incidental to the execution of any power vested by the Constitution in the
Parliament of the Commonwealth or in any department or officer of the Commonwealth.
Thus the Parliament may make provision for matters which arise in the exercise of a power
which is granted to the Parliament (Le Mesurier v. Connor (1929) 42 CLR 481, at pp 497,
498 ). (at p246)

65. It is incidental to the exercise of any power to provide benefits out of public moneys that
there should be some precautions against fraud by the recipients, and generally that there
should be a means of administering the distribution of the benefits so as to prevent the useless
or dishonest expenditure of such moneys. It is essential for these purposes that provision
should be made to prevent administrative confusion arising in the execution of the scheme. A
free medicine scheme applying to all persons resident in Australia applies to over seven
million people. Many of these, unfortunately, have to obtain many doctor's prescriptions in
the course of a year, and it would be safe to say that in any efficient administration of such a
scheme it would be necessary to examine and check a very large number of prescriptions
upon which medicines had been supplied. Accordingly, it is incidental to the exercise of this
particular legislative power that Parliament should, if it thought proper, provide that
prescriptions should be written in a particular manner and that they should be made readily
identifiable by the use upon them of numbers or other symbols which are set forth in a
formulary, and that they should be written in duplicate upon forms officially provided which
can be conveniently registered, recorded, and kept for as long as is thought proper in the
administrative department. Such provisions may reasonably be considered to be desirable, or
even necessary, in order to provide the records which would be required by any form of
responsible administration of the system and for the purpose of requiring proper safeguards in
the expenditure of public money. (at p247)

66. At present I am considering the Act without any reference to the provision in the
Constitution with reference to civil conscription. But even in the case of legislation which is
subject to this limitation there is, in my opinion, no reason why the Commonwealth
Parliament under the power to make laws for the provision of pharmaceutical benefits should
not make laws to require doctors in their practice to write all prescriptions for drugs and
medicines &c. within a prescribed formulary& c. on official forms if they and their patients
wish formulary medicaments &c. to be supplied gratuitously. (at p247)

67. But it is one thing to provide as a condition of giving a pharmaceutical benefit that a
prescription shall be written on a particular form, and another thing to provide that a doctor
shall write any prescription for medicines which are included within a formularly upon a
particular form, whether or not such medicines are to be supplied free under the Act. Section
7A (1) is a provision of the latter description. It cannot in my opinion be supported under the
power to make provision for "medical services," although the writing of a prescription is a
necessary part of very many medical services. It cannot be supported under this part of par.
(xxiiiA.) because it has no relation to any provision by the Commonwealth of the medical
service of writing a prescription. I have already stated my reasons for the opinion that par.
(xxiiiA.) relates only to provision by the Commonwealth, and not by, e.g. doctors in private
practice, of medical services. (at p247)


-----

68. But under a power to make provision by the Commonwealth for pharmaceutical benefits,
the Parliament could (apart from the limitation with respect to civil conscription) validly
require persons, including doctors, to give their services in carrying out the scheme adopted
by Parliament. Compulsory service in relation to this subject matter of Federal legislation
would be as valid as compulsory service in relation to defence. (at p247)

69. For these reasons I have reached the conclusion that all the challenged provisions of the
Act are valid unless they are rendered invalid by the words "but not so as to authorize any
form of civil conscription." (at p247)

70. Civil Conscription. It is convenient here to repeat the words of the Constitution, s. 51
(xxiiiA.). This paragraph confers power upon the Commonwealth Parliament, to make laws
with respect to - "The provision of maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child
endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical and
dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription), benefits to students
and family allowances:". It was assumed without argument (and I think rightly) that the
words "but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription" are consecutive and not final
in significance: they are used to describe a result or consequence, not a purpose or design.
Three questions arise in the present case with respect to this provision - (1) What is the
meaning of "civil conscription"? (2) Does the limitation prohibiting civil conscription apply
only to the immediately preceding words "medical and dental services," or does it also limit
legislative power with respect to the other subjects mentioned in the paragraph, including
pharmaceutical sickness and hospital benefits? (3) If the latter interpretation is that which
should be adopted, do the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 or the regulations
thereunder infringe the prohibition in any and which of their provisions?
(1) The word "conscription" etymologically considered relates only to writing names together
upon a list: see Latin Dictionary, Lewis & Short, sub voce "conscribo." Thus the Conscript
Fathers in republican Rome were the seniors whose names were on a list of those summoned
to the Senate. In both ancient and modern use "conscription" has been principally applied as a
convenient term for the purpose of describing compulsory enlistment for military or similar
services. In recent years there have been many examples of compulsion of other services for
war or other purposes. Such compulsion in relation to industry has been described as
"conscription of labour" and "industrial conscription." Conscription of labour assumes
various forms - forced labour camps containing prisoners of war or foreigners or enemies or
critics of a government behind barbed wire are one form of conscription of labour. Manpower regulations provide another form. The latter provisions were regarded in Australia as
industrial conscription: see National Security Act 1939-1946, s. 5 (7). Section 5 provided for
the making of regulations under the Act, and sub-s. (7) provided that nothing in the section
should authorize - "(a) the imposition of any form of compulsory naval, military or air-force
service, or any form of industrial conscription . . ." When Parliament became of opinion that
it was desirable or necessary to compel persons to render service in particular occupations for
the purposes of prosecuting the war and supplying the needs of the population, civil and
military, s. 13A was introduced into the Act. This section provided that "Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the Governor-General may make such regulations for
requiring persons to place themselves, their services and their property at the disposal of the
Commonwealth, as appear to him to be necessary or expedient for securing the public safety.
. . ." It was under this power that the Manpower Regulations, which were considered and
upheld in Reid v. Sinderberry [1944] HCA 15; (1944) 68 CLR 504 were made. (at p249)


-----

71. The words "but not so as to authorize any form of industrial conscription" were included
in a proposed law to alter the Constitution by empowering the Parliament to make laws with
respect to the terms and conditions of employment in industry. This proposed law was passed
by Parliament but was rejected upon a referendum in 1946. (at p249)

72. The words used in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) relate to "civil conscription." The term "civil
conscription" is wider than industrial conscription. It is applicable in the case of any civilian
service, i.e. non-military, work or service. It could properly be applied to any compulsion of
law requiring that men should engage in a particular occupation, perform particular work, or
perform work in a particular way. There are, however, many laws which control the
rendering of services of one kind and another which could not be described as civil
conscription. For example, a law which provides that no person shall make up prescriptions
or sell certain articles unless he is a qualified chemist is a law which controls the sale of those
articles and the occupation of a pharmaceutical chemist, and a State Parliament can make
such a law. But that law would not compel anybody to work as a pharmaceutical chemist.
Similarly, a law that persons shall not practise as medical practitioners unless they are
qualified in a particular manner and registered is a law which controls medical practice, and a
State Parliament can make a law of this character. But that law would not compel any person
to practise as a doctor. The Commonwealth Parliament could not make such laws. They
would not be laws for the provision of any service by the Commonwealth. (at p249)

73. Conscription (compulsory service) may be complete or partial. It may control a man in
relation to all his services in a particular occupation to which he is assigned, or it may control
only some of the services rendered or the work done by him in that occupation. In my opinion
the limitation imposed by the words "but not so as to authorize any form of civil
conscription" were intended to prevent, not only civil conscription in its complete form of
enrolment of masses of men for compulsory full-time civilian service, but also to prevent any
form whatever of compulsion to render any particular civilian service to the community. The
words "any form" are important. They show that the Parliament intended that any service to
which the limitation applied should be completely voluntary and not procured by compulsion
of law.
(2) The next question is whether the words "but not so as to authorize any form of civil
conscription" apply only to the provision of medical and dental services or to the provision of
each of the other benefits mentioned, i.e. so far as such provision may involve the rendering
of services or the performance of work, for "conscription" can be applied only in relation to
services and work. (at p250)

74. If there had been a comma after the word "services" it probably would not have been
argued that the words within the brackets referring to civil conscription did not apply to all
the beforementioned subject-matters of legislation. An important constitutional question
should only in the last resort be decided upon the presence or absence of a comma. It is in my
opinion better to look at the whole substance of the relevant provision than to begin by
regarding only the punctuation of the paragraph. (at p250)

75. Civil conscription could in practice be applied in making provision for hospital and
sickness and pharmaceutical benefits as well as in providing medical and dental services.
Such conscription was so applied in the recent war when doctors and nurses and chemists
were called up for service. A provision in a Federal law requiring doctors or nurses,
pathologists or bacteriologists, radiologists or chemists to render service under a
Commonwealth scheme would be a form of civil conscription, whether the scheme provided


-----

for hospital benefits or sickness benefits or pharmaceutical benefits. No reason has been
suggested other than the absence of a comma after the words "medical and dental services"
why civil conscription of doctors or dentists should be prohibited in legislation relating to
doctors or dentists passed under the power to make provision for "medical and dental
services," but that doctors and dentists should be compellable to serve in a particular way in
relation to the provision of pharmaceutical benefits or sickness or hospital benefits. In my
opinion the words "but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription" should be read
as imposing a limitation upon the power of legislation with respect to all the matters
mentioned which precede those words so far as they may involve service or work, and
therefore as limiting the legislative power to make laws with respect to the provision of
pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, and not as limiting only the power to make
provision for dental and medical services.
(3) Do the Act or regulations impose "any form of civil conscription"? Section 7A requires
doctors (in the absence of a contrary request in accordance with s. 7A (2) to write their
prescriptions upon a Commonwealth form when the doctor prescribes any of the drugs or
other articles specified in the Commonwealth formulary or the addendum thereto, and the
regulations require him to identify the prescription by reference to the symbol attached to it
by the regulations. Plainly the writing of a prescription is the performance of a service. It is
essentially a service performed by a doctor, and it is necessarily involved in any sensible
scheme of providing free medicine. But, as already stated, the writing of a prescription to
which s. 7A refers is not a medical service which is provided by the Commonwealth. The
patient, in the ordinary case to which s. 7A applies, employs the doctor and is bound to pay
him for his services. The doctor provides the service in return for the payment (or promise of
payment) of a fee. The Commonwealth does not provide the service. For this reason s. 7A
cannot be supported by the provision in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) relating to the provision (that is the
provision by the Commonwealth) of "medical and dental services," and it can be justified, if
at all, only under some other heading of par. (xxiiiA.). Is it then authorized by the words
relating to pharmaceutical sickness and hospital benefits - the only other possibly relevant
categories? (at p251)

76. Section 7A is a provision compelling a doctor who is in practice to practice his
profession, in so far as the important element of writing prescriptions is concerned, in a
particular way. If this is not a form of civil conscription, it would equally not be a form of
civil conscription in relation to "medical services" to prescribe by law that a doctor should
carry on his practice at a particular place, or at a particular time, or for a particular class of
patients and not for other patients, and that he should follow a prescribed routine in dealing
with his patients. If laws imposing such requirements were held not to be civil conscription
the result would be that, without infringing the prohibition of civil conscription, the whole
practice of a doctor could be completely controlled, not merely by negative provisions, but
also by positive provisions requiring him to do certain acts in his practice. (at p251)

77. If the doctor prescribes a formulary medicament and does not write it upon a government
form in accordance with the Act and the regulations and there is no request from the patient
or person requesting the prescription that he should write it upon another form, he is liable to
a penalty of 50 pounds under s. 7A (2). (at p252)

78. Section 7A should be considered, not in vacuo, but as applying to an existing medical
profession. It is true that the doctor may escape the penalty by not writing a prescription. The
allegations in the statement of claim, however, are to the effect that a doctor could not carry
on practice without writing many prescription s which are included in the formulary.


-----

Accordingly, the doctor is not given any live option. He must, in the absence of a request
from the patient or other person (which, as already stated, he has no power or right to procure
or control), either use the Commonwealth forms or go out of practice. This is a very real
power of compulsion. There are various ways of compelling people to a course of action. The
imposition of a penalty or imprisonment is a common form of compulsion. (at p252)

79. In the Thirteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America there is
a provision - "Section 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment
for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United
States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction. Section 2. Congress shall have power to
enforce this article by appropriate legislation." This prohibition has been construed broadly so
as to give effect to its evident purpose and to prevent evasion by the creation of crimes in
relation to acts or omissions which are connected with the rendering of services. In a statute
passed to enforce this article of the Constitution the Congress provided that any State laws
establishing or enforcing peonage - voluntary or involuntary service in liquidation of a debt
or obligation - should be null and void. In Alonzo Bailey v. State of Alabama [1911] USSC
3; (1911) 219 US 219, at p 243 [1911] USSC 3; (55 Law Ed 191, at p 203) the Supreme
Court said: - "The Act of Congress, nullifying all state laws by which it should be attempted
to enforce the 'service or labor of any persons as peons, in liquidation of any debt or
obligation, or otherwise,' necessarily embraces all legislation which seeks to compel the
service or labor by making it a crime to refuse or fail to perform it. Such laws would furnish
the readiest means of compulsion." The fact that a peon could release himself by the payment
of his debt did not make his service any the less compulsory (1911) 219 US, at p 243 (55 Law
Ed, at p 203) . In United States v. Reynolds; United States v. Broughton [1914] USSC 262;
(1914) 235 US 133, at p 146 [1914] USSC 262; (59 Law Ed 162, at p 167) the Court said: "Compulsion of such service by the constant fear of imprisonment under the criminal laws
renders the work compulsory, as much so as authority to arrest and hold his person would be
if the law authorized that to be done." No distinction in this connection can be drawn between
fear of imprisonment and fear of a fine. These cases show that the court regarded the
substance of the legislation, as determined by its actual operation in the circumstances in
which it applied, in reaching a conclusion as to whether or not a law established involuntary
servitude. (at p253)

80. So also in the case of "civil conscription" this Court should consider the operation of the
Act in relation to the persons upon whom a penalty would be imposed in the case of a breach
of s. 7A. Those persons are doctors who earn their living by practising medicine. Recent
experience in Europe has shown that the most successful means of compulsion of services is
to be found in the deprivation of means of subsistence. There could in my opinion be no more
effective means of compulsion than is to be found in a legal provision that unless a person
acts in a particular way he shall not be allowed to earn his living in the way, and possibly in
the only way, in which he is qualified to earn a living. (at p253)

81. I summarize my opinion upon this question in the propositions that the prohibition of
"any form" of civil conscription prevents any compulsory service being required under a
Federal law for the provision of pharmaceutical benefits, that the prohibition applies to
piecemeal as well as to whole-time compulsion, and that in determining whether there is
compulsion it is proper to consider not only the bare legal provision but also the effect of that
provision in relation to the class of persons to whom it is applied in the actual economic and
other circumstances of that class. (at p253)


-----

82. In my opinion s. 7A does impose a form of civil conscription. (at p253)

83. I am therefore of opinion that s. 7A of the Act is invalid. The terms of the constitutional
amendment shew a concern to avoid in the application of legislation which might be passed
under the new constitutional power any form of compulsion of services in relation to the
subject-matter of such laws. The object of conferring power upon the Commonwealth
Parliament to make laws for the provision of pharmaceutical benefits was to enable the
Parliament to make laws with respect to (inter alia) the provision of pharmaceutical benefits
by the Commonwealth under a scheme which should involve no compulsion of service by an
person, which would leave every person, according to his own will, and not by reason of the
exercise of the will of Parliament or of any other person, at liberty to take part in the
execution of the scheme or to stand outside the scheme altogether, whether as doctor, as
chemist or as patient. (at p253)

84. In my opinion the validity of s. 7A does not affect the validity of any of the other
provisions of the Act. If s. 7A is struck out of the Act, the rest of the Act will work as a
completely voluntary scheme, chemists, doctors and patients utilizing or taking the benefit of
the scheme each according to his own individual choice. (at p254)

85. In my opinion the demurrer should be overruled. (at p254)

RICH J. The demurrer in this action raises a question which is of great importance, not only
to the community in general, but to the medical profession in particular. And I premise my
judgment by venturing to repeat that a judicial tribunal has nothing to do with the policy of
any Act which it may be called upon to interpret: (Vacher & Sons Ltd. v. London Society of
Compositors [1912] UKHL 3; (1913) AC 107, at p 118 ; McCawley v. The King [1918] HCA
55; (1918) 26 CLR 9, at p 45 ; Ex parte Walsh and Johnson; In re Yates [1925] HCA 53;
(1925) 37 CLR 36, at p 126 ). Our duty is to interpret the Act. The Act in question the
validity of which is attacked is the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 which was passed
in purported exercise of the power conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament by par.
(xxiiiA.) of s. 51 of the Constitution. This addition to the Constitution was the result of the
decision of this Court in Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30;
(1945) 71 CLR 237 . In that case the majority of the Court held in effect that the original
Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1944 was invalid because it was considered that the power of
appropriation of money under s. 81 of the Constitution did not extend to payments for
maternity allowances, child endowment and widows pensions, social services being limited
by s. 51 (xxiii.) to invalid and old age pensions. Its object was to increase the social services
beyond those already provided for by par. (xxiii.) of s. 51. The new provision added to the
Constitution in 1946 reads: - "The provision of maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child
endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical and
dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription), benefits to students
and family allowances." In the first place in interpreting this provision I consider that the
provision of these services is to be by the Commonwealth and not by any State or other
person. Then I think that the bracketed phrase "but not so as to authorize any form of civil
conscription" is restricted to the phrase "medical and dental services." Although punctuation
is not to be entirely disregarded, it should not control the meaning of the words where such
meaning seems otherwise reasonably clear: Mayor, &c. of Geelong v. Geelong Harbour Trust
Commissioners [1923] VicLawRp 85; (1923) VLR 652, at p 657 ; President, &c. of the Shire
of Charlton v. Ruse [1912] HCA 33; (1912) 14 CLR 220, at p 230 ; Committee of Direction
of Fruit Marketing v. Collins [1925] HCA 25; (1925) 36 CLR 410, at p 421 . In addition to its


-----

punctuation the form and structure of the phrase lead me to the construction I have adopted.
But I disclaim any suggestion that the spasmodic sprinkling of commas by draftsmen, printers
or proof readers should dominate interpretation. The phrase "civil conscription" next calls for
interpretation. It is somewhat of a novelty. Military conscription and industrial conscription
are familiar combinations. The draftsman apparently shied at the naked simplicity of the word
"compulsion," but I think that the phrase means compulsion in connection with "medical and
dental services." Turning to the Act the crucial question is whether s. 7A imposes civil
conscription as thus interpreted. The Chief Justice and Dixon J. have dealt fully with the
details involved in the controversy. I have confined my judgment to what I conceive to be the
crucial question in this matter, namely, whether the provisions of s. 7A of the Act can be
regarded as a form of civil conscription. The demurrer of necessity admits all the allegations
in the statement of claim. And I would particularly refer to the following paragraphs of the
statement of claim: - "8. Uncompounded medicines, medical compounds, medical materials
and medical appliances are hereinafter referred to as 'medicaments.' Medicaments the names
or formulae of which are contained or deemed to be included in the Commonwealth
Pharmaceutical Formulary referred to in the Act and Regulations and hereinafter called 'The
Formulary' or in the prescribed addendum thereto are hereinafter referred to as 'formulary
medicaments'. Medicaments the names or formulae of which are not so contained or deemed
are hereinafter referred to as 'extra-formulary medicaments.' 9. A large part of the
professional work done by doctors consists of prescribing for the supply to their patients of
such one or more, or such combinations of two or more, of the medicaments comprised in the
following classes as in the opinion of doctors is or are in each case necessary or advisable for
the proper medicinal treatment of the patient: (a) formulary medicaments; (b) medicaments,
either formulary or extra-formulary, specified to be supplied in the form of a particular trade
mark, brand, make or proprietary equivalent and in no other form; (c) extra-formulary
medicaments consisting of medicinal compounds compounded according to formulae
contained in the Formulary with variations other than those specified by the Regulations as
being permitted variations of those formulae; (d) other extra-formulary medicaments. 10. A
large number of the medicaments prescribed by doctors for supply to patients are formulary
medicaments. No doctor could carry on the practice of his profession with due regard to the
proper medicinal treatment of his patients or at all if he were unable lawfully to prescribe all
formulary medicaments and all medicaments comprised in any other of the abovementioned
classes. . . . 12. On the coming into operation of all the provisions of the Act the plaintiff
doctors will be substantially prevented from and hindered in practising and carrying on their
professions and hindered in the proper medicinal treatment of their patients by (inter alia) the
requirements of the Act and the Regulations relating to the writing of prescriptions, the
repeating of prescriptions, the quantities of formulary medicaments that may be prescribed,
the prescription of formulary medicaments in the form of a particular trade mark, brand,
make or proprietary equivalent, and the permitted variations of formulae contained in the
Formulary." The question is one of law and, as I have said, this question is the proper
construction of s. 7A. It is true that no one is compelled to adopt the profession of medicine.
But if he does do so he is affected in his freedom of practice and in his means of living unless
he subscribes to the scheme whereby he is subject to control as to the form of the treatment
and the drugs which he may prescribe for his patient. For the general practitioner noncompliance means loss of practice. The use of a particular form or the signing of a
prescription is no mere automatic action. It is the result of the practitioner's examination and
overhaul of the patient, diagnosis of the complaint and the choice of the treatment, drugs,
materials and appliances which his knowledge and skill dictate. It is the culmination of the
medical service rendered by the practitioner to the patient. This may perhaps not be


-----

compulsion in the sense in which the word is used in connection with military service but, in
my opinion, it is a form of civil conscription. (at p256)

2. An extremely important consideration which cannot be disregarded is the confidential
relationship of doctor and patient, a relationship akin to that of solicitor and client and priest
and penitent. To disregard this relationship compels a doctor to abandon his normal duties
and obligations to his patient. (at p256)

3. I would overrule the demurrer. (at p256)

DIXON J. The object of this suit is to obtain a decision upon the validity of the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 or of certain parts of the Act and of the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Regulations. The matter is brought before us by a demurrer to the
statement of claim. (at p257)

2. The first plaintiff named in the writ is the Federal Council of the British Medical
Association in Australia, a body incorporated under the law of New South Wales, one of the
objects of which is to advance the general interests of the medical profession in Australia. It
may be doubted whether this body has, as a corporation, a sufficient material interest, which
would be prejudiced by the operation of the Act, to give it a title to maintain the suit (see Real
Estate Institute of New South Wales v. Blair [1946] HCA 43; (1946) 73 CLR 213, at pp 227,
228 ). But the point is of no importance, because there are six other plaintiffs all of whom
practise medicine or surgery. The interest which they have is enough to enable them to
complain, if the legislation is invalid as a whole or if severable provisions are invalid which
would directly affect the practice of medicine or surgery. It is hardly necessary to add that if
provisions of the Act or Regulations which would not in themselves affect the plaintiffs and
do not touch the practice of their profession are found to be severable so that the operation of
other parts of the Act or Regulations is not dependent upon them, the interest of the plaintiffs
will not enable them to obtain a declaration concerning the validity of such provisions. It is
convenient to illustrate this by the example which is supplied by s. 13 (1), (2), (2A), (2B) and
(2C) of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949. Sub-section (1) of s. 13 enables the
Director-General for good cause shown to suspend or revoke his approval of a
pharmaceutical chemist, of a hospital authority or of a medical practitioner who practises in
an area where there is no pharmaceutical chemist and who has been approved for the purpose
of supplying pharmaceutical benefits. Sub-section (2) purports to give an appeal to the
Supreme Court of a State against the suspension or revocation of the approval, and sub-s.
(2A) purports to invest the Supreme Court of each State with jurisdiction to hear and
determine the appeals. Sub-sections (2B) and (2C) deal with the powers of the Court and with
procedure upon such appeals. (at p257)

3. The contention was advanced that sub-ss. (2), (2A), (2B) and (2C) are attempts to confer
an authority and impose a duty of an administrative kind upon State Courts and so go beyond
the power given to the Parliament by s. 77 (iii.) of the Constitution and cannot be supported.
It is a suggestion not lightly to be rejected. For apparently, even if the Supreme Court were to
find in any given case that some objective good cause existed, then, according to the intention
of the provision, it would remain for the Supreme Court to exercise an undefined discretion
concerning the suspension or withdrawal of the approval of the appellant. But I think that it is
reasonably clear that if the provisions of sub-ss. (2), (2A), (2B) and (2C) proved invalid as an
attempt to authorize and require the Supreme Courts of the States to perform a function
outside judicial power, the invalidity would not involve more of the Act than sub-s. (1) and so


-----

much of the operation of sub-s. (4) as relates to sub-s. (1) as distinguished from sub-s. (3). It
is not alleged that any of the plaintiffs practises in a particular area in which there is no
approved pharmaceutical chemist and, even if he did, it would not give him a sufficient
present interest to raise, as an independent question, the validity of the attempt to give a right
of appeal if the double contingency should occur in the future of his being approved for the
purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits and of his approval subsequently being revoked
or suspended. It follows that, since s. 13 (1), (2), (2A), (2B) and (2C) are, as I think, severable
from the rest of the Act so that their invalidity would not bring the rest of the Act down, the
question whether they are invalid does not arise in this suit for determination. The question of
their validity is therefore to be put on one side. (at p258)

4. The suggestion that they are invalid provides an illustration, and a not unimportant one, of
the fact that what is before the Court for decision is the validity of the Act as it affects the
practice of medicine. Every provision of the Act and of the regulations received some
examination during the argument of the demurrer. Apart from the general attack upon the
Act, separate questions were raised about the validity of not a few of them. This was both
natural and proper. But unless the provisions affect medical practice or are inseverable from
others which do, the extent of their own separate intrinsic validity must, as in the example I
have taken, be an abstract or hypothetical question outside the scope of the suit. What the suit
is concerned with is the provisions which directly affect medical practice and with the
indispensable elements of the plan to which the legislation seeks to give effect. As the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Regulations now
stand, there can be no doubt that both in its direct and in its consequential operation, the plan
which the chief provisions embody must touch the practice of medicine and affect the
interests of the plaintiffs. Accordingly there was no denial of the competency of the plaintiffs
to maintain the suit. (at p258)

5. The question whether the main provisions of the Act and regulations are valid depends
upon the legislative power conferred upon the Parliament by the amendment called
Constitutional Alteration (Social Services) 1946, and upon the application if any of s. 51
(xxxi.) of the Constitution to the legislation. (at p259)

6. Like all other legislative powers, the power conferred by the amendment includes matters
that are incidental to the expressed purpose of the power. Like other legislative powers it does
not take the form of a definition, framed with any attempt at precision, of the kind or kinds of
law that may be made under it. It does resemble other powers in consisting in the names of
specified subject matters designated in the briefest terms. Indeed there is a list of such
designations. But it differs from other powers in two respects. (at p259)

7. In the first place the power is not to legislate simply upon the matters so named. It is a
power to legislate with respect to "the provision of" such matters. In the second place it
contains a qualification of an unexampled kind, introduced by the words "but not so as to
authorize." Eleven things are named in respect of the provision of which the Parliament is
empowered to make laws. Paragraph (xxiiiA.) enables the Parliament to make laws with
respect to the provision of (1) maternity allowances, (2) widows' pensions, (3) child
endowment, (4) unemployment benefits, (5) pharmaceutical benefits, (6) sickness benefits,
(7) hospital benefits, (8) medical services, (9) dental services, (10) benefits to students, (11)
family allowances. (at p259)


-----

8. The word "allowances" seems clearly enough to refer to monetary allowances and of
course the word "pensions" denotes money payments. One of the meanings of the word
"endow" is to provide or secure a permanent income for a person or an object. In the
expression "child endowment" the word endowment is used in a corresponding sense with
reference to periodical payments in respect of children. In 1929 there was a Royal
Commission on "Child Endowment or Family Allowances." Valid or invalid, a Federal Child
Endowment Act was passed in 1941 (No. 8) and the expression was familiar in State
legislation. In the report by Sir William Beveridge on Social Insurance and Allied Services
(1942) the expression chosen is "Children's Allowances." (at p259)

9. The word "benefits" has a long history in the vocabulary of friendly and benefit societies
as a general name for the payments in money and for the provision of medical attention,
medicines and funeral arrangements made by such societies to or for their contributing
members and their dependants in case of sickness or death. It is the word used in the National
Insurance Act 1946 of the United Kingdom to cover medical treatment and attendance,
periodical payments during incapacity through disease or bodily or mental disablement, a
payment called maternity benefit and certain other payments and provisions, such as for
nursing, for dental treatment and for periods of convalescence. The word was used in the
Federal Unemployment and Sickness Benefits Act 1944 as well as in the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Act 1944. The general sense of the word "benefit" covers anything tending to the
profit advantage gain or good of a man and is very indefinite. But it is used in a rather more
specialized application in reference to what are now called social services; it is used as a
word covering provisions made to meet needs arising from special conditions with a
recognized incidence in communities or from particular situations or pursuits such as that of a
student, whether the provision takes the form of money payments or the supply of things or
services. (at p260)

10. The introductory expression in par. (xxiiiA.) "the provision of," governed as it is by the
words "with respect to," might conceivably be read as giving a power to legislate about the
providing of the allowances, benefits and services to which the paragraph refers whoever did
the providing. If it were read thus it would extend to legislation dealing directly and
substantially and not merely incidentally, with provisions made by State Governments, public
bodies, voluntary associations, trading companies and private persons for any of the purposes
enumerated, however limited the application of the provision. It would follow that these
governments, bodies and persons might, by legislation under the power, be compelled to
make such provision in accordance with whatever obligations the Parliament thought fit to
impose upon them. But I am clearly of opinion that this is not the true meaning of the words
"with respect to the provision of." The purpose of the constitutional amendment was to
enable the Commonwealth to provide the pensions allowances endowments benefits and
services which par (xxiiiA.) mentions. That is shown by the character of the things for the
provision of which laws may be made, which are recognized social services the establishment
of which is now considered to be within the province of government. The conclusion is
confirmed by the history of the matter; and it is supported by the placing of the new
paragraph after s. 51 (xxiii.), which deals with invalid and old age pensions. The meaning
appears to me to be the same as if the power had been expressed as one to make laws to
provide &c. It might have been so expressed had it not been for the words "in respect of" at
the head of the section. These words made the use of a substantive or verbal noun necessary
and doubtless this accounts for the choice of the words "the provision." But to say that the
meaning is the same as if the power had been one to provide the benefits& c. enumerated is
not to restrict the Commonwealth to providing them directly and at the expense of the


-----

Treasury. The power perhaps might, for example, cover the establishment of contributory
schemes; and it would cover the provision of benefits &c. through separate bodies set up for
the purpose. (at p261)

11. The qualification of the power introduced by the words "but not so as to authorize" to
which I have referred occurs after the words "medical and dental services." Enclosed in
brackets are the words "but not so as so authorize any form of civil conscription." The
paragraph is punctuated with a comma before the word "medical" and with the next comma
after the brackets are closed. So, if the punctuation is to govern the construction, the words in
brackets qualify only the expression "medical and dental services" and not the preceding
expressions amongst which the words "pharmaceutical benefits" occur. That this is intended
is shown by the fact that the bracketed words are not placed at the end of the paragraph, that
is after the words "family allowances." The purpose no doubt was to prevent laws made with
respect to medical or dental services imposing duties which would amount to "a form of civil
conscription." The inference is, I think, that it was not supposed that a legislative power with
respect to the provision of the allowances, pensions, endowments and benefits that are
mentioned in the paragraph as distinguished from "services" could extend to the imposition
of duties amounting to a form of civil conscription. If so, the assumption supports the view
that the paragraph authorizes only laws with respect to provisions made or established by the
Commonwealth. (at p261)

12. The expression "not so as to authorize" seems to mean that the grant of the power to the
Parliament shall not authorize the Parliament to impose any form of civil conscription. But
the grammatical place and the form of the qualification strictly mean that the law made by the
Parliament itself shall not authorize the imposition of a form of civil conscription, by, I
suppose, the executive. In its application to the legislation under consideration the distinction
makes no difference in the result. Much depends, however, upon the meaning of the words
"any form of civil conscription." This vague and figurative expression carries with it no clear
conception. From the power to make regulations conferred upon the Governor-General in
Council by s. 5 of the National Security Act 1939 there was a parallel exclusion of any form
of industrial conscription. The meaning of this expression was never elucidated but perhaps it
inspired the bracketed exception in s. 51 (xxiiiA.). No one would doubt that an attempt to
impose upon a medical practitioner or a dentist an obligation to serve in the employment of
the Government would fall within the words. Nor, I suppose, would there be any doubt that
they would cover any attempt to impose upon a medical man a duty of attending patients for
fees paid or provided by the Government. But the question is whether an incidental
interference in the complete freedom of medical practice involves a form of civil
conscription. It is suggested that the word "civil" is used merely to ensure that medical men
and dentists will remain liable to military conscription. I think it does something more than
that. The word "conscription" has no proper application except to compulsory enlistment for
the armed services. Like the word "draft," which too properly applies only to obligatory
military service, it has a metaphorical use. A man who is pressed into any task or work or is
required to accept any office is said to be drafted for it, a use of the word which is common in
the United States. When the word "conscription" is taken from its primary use and the word
"civil" is added to it the compound expression seems to me to indicate a single conception. It
is described by a metaphor and therefore must rest upon analogy. The difficulty is that, so far
as I am aware, it is not an expression which has gained general currency or has acquired a
recognized application. Mr. Sholl, who appeared for the State of Victoria intervening, said
that "any form of civil conscription" included any compulsion legal or practical by
Commonwealth law to do in a civil capacity any act in the course of medical practice for the


-----

purpose of the provision of medical services. This of course was not intended to be an
exhaustive definition, but it brings out clearly what perhaps in this case is the critical question
concerning the meaning of the expression. It does so because it insists that if compulsion is
applied to any act, that is any separate thing, it will amount to a form of civil conscription,
provided the act is in the course of medical practice and for the purposes of the provision of
medical services. The question which this brings out is whether the isolation of an incident in
medical practice and the imposition of a duty in reference to what is done can fall within the
conception described by the words "any form of civil conscription," or whether on the other
hand compulsory service or the compulsory performance of a service or services is not
connoted. The meaning of indefinite expressions cannot often be determined in the abstract.
It is only by settling what application an expression like "civil conscription" has to definite
situations that its exact scope can be worked out. In the present case the particular problem
presented is whether the specific requirement imposed by s. 7A of the Act and reg. 11 as to
the use of forms for the writing of prescriptions and to the manner of doing it amount to an
attempt at a form of civil conscription. This question can better be dealt with after I have
expressed my opinion upon the validity of the Act and regulations considered generally.
Therefore, with these preliminary observations upon the verbiage employed in s. 51 (xxiiiA.),
I shall proceed to the consideration of that subject. (at p263)

13. The plan of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 depends upon the promulgation
of a list of uncompounded medicines and of formulae of medical compounds and of another
list of "materials and appliances." The first list is called the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical
Formulary and the second the addendum thereto. The lists are prescribed by regulations made
by the Governor-General in Council. The Act calls the things on the two lists pharmaceutical
benefits: s. 6. There is no harm in this choice of terminology so long as it is not supposed that
the same words in the Constitution have the same meaning. (at p263)

14. Then there is a general declaration that every person ordinarily resident in the
Commonwealth shall be entitled to receive pharmaceutical benefits in accordance with the
Act: s. 7 (1) and s. 4 (2). Exceptions may be prescribed and the provision itself excepts
persons occupying a bed in a public ward of a public hospital. Pharmaceutical chemists, on
their application, are to be approved by the Director-General of Health in respect of particular
premises for the purpose of supplying in accordance with the Act pharmaceutical benefits at
and from those premises: s. 9 (1) and s. 4 (2). Then when he does supply pharmaceutical
benefits in accordance with the Act a chemist is entitled to payment in respect thereof from
the Commonwealth in accordance with the regulations: s. 14 (1) and s. 4 (2). Payments are to
be made out of the Trust Account called the National Welfare Fund: s. 17. The rates of
payment are fixed by regulations: s. 14 (1), s. 23 (c), reg. 31. The approved chemist may not
demand or received any other payment in respect of the supply in accordance with the Act of
a pharmaceutical benefit: s. 7 (3). Exceptions may be prescribed and certain exceptions have
been made. They consist in special charges for the supply of medicine outside ordinary hours
or for delivery: s. 7 (4) and reg. 13. (at p263)

15. But no person is entitled to receive in accordance with the Act a pharmaceutical benefit
from an approved chemist except on presentation of a prescription written and signed by a
medical practitioner. The prescription must, subject to prescribed exceptions, be on a form
supplied by the Commonwealth for the purposes of the Act: s. 8 (1). Further, a person is not
entitled to receive a pharmaceutical benefit from an approved chemist except at or from
premises in respect of which he has been approved: s. 8 (1). From this it follows that in order
to be entitled to receive payment from the Commonwealth the approved pharmaceutical


-----

chemist must (a) supply something on the formulary or the addendum; (b) supply it on
presentation of a prescription from a medical practitioner; (c) supply it at or from the
approved premises; (d) save in prescribed exceptional cases, act only on a prescription on a
form supplied to medical practitioners by the Commonwealth. But if these conditions are
fulfilled the approved chemist is forbidden to receive any payment for supplying the
medicine or article except from the Commonwealth, though he may make a special charge for
supplying it after hours or for delivery. The foregoing comprises the basal elements in the
plan for pharmaceutical benefits which is embodied in the Act and regulations as they stood
until amendments were made during this year. There are many additional matters provided
for in the Act and regulations and some of them are drawn into the question of the validity of
the legislation. But they do not in my opinion go to the essence of the plan. It is more
convenient to deal with them separately. (at p264)

16. It will be seen that unless medical practitioners when prescribing medicines contained in
the formulary use the forms supplied for the purpose by the Commonwealth the approved
chemist cannot supply the medicines free to his customer and obtain payment from the
Commonwealth. Apparently it was assumed that medical practitioners would use the forms.
But by Act No. 8 of 1949 a provision was inserted in the Act imposing upon them an express
duty to use the forms when prescribing medicines, materials or appliances covered by the
formulary or the addendum. This provision was replaced by a similar but more qualified
provision substituted by Act No. 26 of 1949 and it is the latter with which we are concerned.
It stands in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 as s. 7A. Its effect may be shortly
stated thus. It makes it an offence for a medical practitioner to write a prescription on
anything but a form supplied by the Commonwealth if the following conditions are fulfilled (1) the person in respect of whom it is written is entitled to receive in accordance with the Act
pharmaceutical benefits; (2) what is prescribed is covered by the formulary or the addendum;
(3) either the person in respect of whom the prescription is written or the person at whose
request it is written does not ask him not to write it on such a form; (4) the case does not fall
under some prescribed exception. An exception has been prescribed when a medical
practitioner considers it necessary to write a prescription but a form is not immediately
available. In that case he may use any suitable paper but he must state that a form is not
available and entitle the prescription with the words "Pharmaceutical Benefits Act."
Afterwards he must give the chemist a prescription on a form - reg. 11 (4)-(6). The
regulations direct that a prescription must be written on the prescribed form in duplicate and
must be dated, and that not more than one prescription shall be written on a form and that a
line shall be drawn through the unused portion of the form: reg. 11 (2). A medical practitioner
is forbidden to use a prescription form for any purpose but writing a prescription for the
purposes of the Act and from giving it or sending it to any other person except to another
practitioner, and in that case he must keep a record of what he has given him: reg. 11 (3) and
(9) and (10). By a recent amendment, the regulations impose upon the Director-General of
Health an obligation to make available supplies of forms and to furnish them to medical
practitioners on request: reg. 11A. (at p265)

17. The provision of s. 7A and of the regulations dealing with the use and custody of
prescription forms directly affect medical practice and it is upon these provisions that the
attack was centred. Their validity was impugned on the ground that, considered as separate
provisions, they went beyond the subject matter of Federal power and on the further ground
that they were obnoxious to the restriction on power imposed by the words "but not so as to
authorize any form of civil conscription." But it is apparent that these provisions are auxiliary
only to the general plan, so that if in any essential respect the principal provisions of the Act


-----

are unconstitutional the auxiliary provisions will share in the invalidity because of their
dependency. For this and, no doubt, other reasons, the validity of the whole Act and of its
chief clause was impugned, independently of s. 7A and of the regulations dealing with the
use and care of prescription forms. (at p265)

18. In my opinion an examination of the grounds of this attack leads to the conclusion that it
has no solid foundation. I think that the statute in its general conception and in its essential
provisions is within power. It is a law with respect to the provision by the Commonwealth of
pharmaceutical benefits. I do not say that there are not provisions which are too widely
expressed or that every part of the Act and regulations is referable to that subject or is valid.
But that is the main character of the legislation. I am unable to adopt the view that it amounts
to a law with respect to drugs and medicines or a law to compel or to control the supply of
drugs and medicines. The elements which give the legislation its true character lie in the
provisions which entitle individuals to obtain from chemists medicines at the cost of the
Commonwealth if they are prescribed by a medical practitioner. These provisions appear to
me to constitute a law to provide pharmaceutical benefits. I am not prepared at present to
subscribe to the doctrine that laws under s. 51 (xxiiia.) can only provide drugs and medicines
which the laws of the State for the time being permit. But let it be assumed that it is so. That
only means that if the formulary compiled under s. 6 (1) (a) contains the names of medicines
or formulae for medicinal compounds, which the law of the State prohibits, then the medical
practitioner cannot prescribe them and the chemist cannot supply them. (at p266)

19. The fact that s. 6 (1) (a) goes directly to medicines and medicinal compounds and calls
them pharmaceutical benefits has not, in my opinion, any tendency to show that the Act is not
one for providing pharmaceutical benefits as that phrase is used in par. (xxiiia.). Section 21
(a), (b) and (c) and s. 23 (e) are merely ancillary and do not give the law any other character
than one for the provision of pharmaceutical benefits. Possibly they or some of them are
framed too widely, but the question whether that is so is of no importance. For clearly they
are severable provisions and in any case s. 15A of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901-1948
would apply. Literally read, s. 6 (1) fails to confine the medicines and medicinal compounds
which may be included in the formulary to those suitable to human beings or the materials
and appliances to those which are used for purposes of the treatment, care, relief, comfort or
assistance of the sick or injured or of others under physical disability. It was therefore said
that the formulary and addendum might include veterinary medicines and every article
pharmaceutical chemists sell and that a medical practitioner, finding them on the formulary,
might think fit to prescribe any of them. Thus, it was contended, s. 6 (1) extended far beyond
the power with respect to the provision of pharmaceutical benefits and as the plan of the
legislation was, so to speak, developed from s. 6 its excessive width brought the Act down.
(at p266)

20. The short answer is that s. 6 (1) is not to be read with such intense literalness. The general
words it contains are to be read in their context. The context includes a provision limiting the
right to obtain a pharmaceutical benefit to cases where what is required has been prescribed
by a legally qualified medical practitioner. Paragraph (b) of sub-s. (1) is severable and even if
it were void its invalidity would not bring down the Act. But s. 15A of the Acts Interpretation
Act 1901-1948 applies and makes it necessary to read the general words subject to the power
and that means, in this instance, the power to provide pharmaceutical benefits within the
constitutional meaning of these words. The possibility of a medical practitioner prescribing
drugs for animals if the formulary contained them probably did not occur to the draftsman.
But even if it had been intended it could not infect the whole Act with invalidity. (at p267)


-----

21. Much reliance was placed upon the situation in which approved pharmaceutical chemists
stood. It appears from the allegations in the statement of claim that nearly all chemists
carrying on business in Australia had applied for approval before the amendments made in
the Act and regulations during this year were brought forward. Approval must be granted
upon application: s. 9 (1). But the authority of the Director-General to comply with a request
by an approved chemist to revoke approval is conferred in permissive language. He "may at
the request of an approved pharmaceutical chemist . . . revoke his approval of that
pharmaceutical chemist." It is not easy to spell into this language a duty on the part of the
Director-General to comply with the request. Accordingly it is claimed that the legislation
enables the authorities to hold approved chemists to the performance of the duties imposed
upon them by the Act and the regulations as they now stand whether they desire to continue
or not. But even if it were not so, no chemist, it is said, could afford to relinquish his position
as an approved pharmaceutical chemist, if the medical practitioners are obliged to use the
prescribed forms. For his business would, in too great a measure, depend upon supplying the
prescribed medicines. The duties of the approved chemist do not appear to me to include an
imperative legal obligation to supply prescribed medicines, materials or appliances. But no
doubt a refusal to do so might lead to the suspension or withdrawal of the chemist's approval
under s. 13 (1). I do not think that s. 23 (a) should be construed as enabling the GovernorGeneral in Council to provide that it should be an offence for a chemist to fail to supply
prescribed medicines. If it were so construed I should doubt its validity, as I doubt the
validity of reg. 22, which purports to impose upon an approved chemist a legal duty, certainly
of a rather vague description, to stock drugs. To place such obligations upon chemists seems
to go beyond what is incidental to the provision by the Commonwealth of pharmaceutical
benefits. But the validity of these provisions, which do not affect the plaintiffs and are
severable, cannot be called in question in this suit. (at p267)

22. There remain, however, the considerations that drugs, materials or appliances prescribed
by a medical practitioner on a Commonwealth form, if in the formulary or addendum cannot
be supplied to the customer for a price paid by him; that payment must be claimed from the
Commonwealth; and the rates are not within the discretion of the chemist but are fixed by
regulation by means of the Pharmaceutical Tariff. (at p268)

23. There is some difficulty of interpretation concerning the scope of the prohibition against
receiving payment from a person presenting a prescription on a Commonwealth form signed
by a medical practitioner. The difficulty arises from the drafting device adopted consisting of
the use in the body of the Act of the words supply, obtain and receive and of the making of a
general provision that such words shall be read as a reference to the supply, obtaining or
receipt of the pharmaceutical benefit in accordance with the Act: s. 4 (2). The result of this is
that a payment from the Commonwealth cannot be claimed by the chemist unless the
medicine has been supplied in accordance with the Act and that means a regular prescription
on the proper form in duplicate and a supply at or from the premises of the chemist in respect
of which he has been approved. Does it follow that if there is a departure from any of these
requirements he can charge the customer and at a price not fixed by the Pharmaceutical
Tariff? That depends on s. 7 (3) and the application of s. 4 (2) to the word "supply" where it
occurs in s. 7 (3). I am disposed to think the answer is in the affirmative. Clearly enough s. 8
is limited throughout by the qualification expressed in s. 4 (2), notwithstanding that specific
conditions or requirements are expressed in s. 8 itself. Accordingly, it appears to me that if
the conditions imposed by s. 8 or any other relevant part of the Act are not complied with the
person seeking the "pharmaceutical benefit" has no right to its free supply under the Act and
may purchase the medicine or the material or appliance whether from an approved chemist or


-----

elsewhere. But these are minor matters and have small effect upon the situation of the
pharmaceutical chemist as stated above. It is said that his situation involves a degree of
compulsion upon him which goes beyond the power to legislate for providing pharmaceutical
benefits and also that it amounts to an acquisition of property from him upon terms that are
not just. (at p268)

24. These are contentions that, for clearness at all events, require separate consideration. The
first of them depends, I think, upon a conception of the power which excludes the possibility
of a law being validly made thereunder if its operation is such as to create a situation of
economic, business or practical pressure which constrains a man to act in a way desired by
the legislature. This seems to me an indefinite, not to say slippery, conception, and one that
has no clear connection with the question whether the legislation constitutes a law for the
provision by the Commonwealth of pharmaceutical benefits. Even if, contrary to the view I
have expressed, the words "but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription" applied
to the provision of pharmaceutical benefits, it would be difficult to say that the chemist was
subjected to a form of civil conscription. He can refuse to supply a prescription. He can
supply it from other premises. He is an approved chemist because he applied for approval. I
am not impressed by the suggestion that chemists sought approval under a scheme which has
since been materially changed so that a chemist may say non haec in foedera veni. The
amendments in the Act with one exception work no material alteration of the scheme or plan
of 1947 and the amendments of the regulations do not do so unless the enlargement of the
ambit of the formulary be considered material. The exception is the introduction of s. 7A. But
if this section proved effective, the result upon the chemist would be no more than if the
medical practitioners had voluntarily used the forms. That the chemists must have
contemplated as a possibility when they sought approval. Any full exercise of the power to
legislate to provide pharmaceutical benefits must mean either the use of existing
pharmaceutical chemists as suppliers of medicines or the use of new agencies. It is difficult to
see why the economic consequences upon chemists should put it beyond power. The dilemma
which the legislative choice of the first of these alternatives presented to chemists of either
coming in or staying out of the scheme does not seem to me to be civil conscription or to
place the measure outside the power to provide pharmaceutical benefits. (at p269)

25. The contention that s. 51 (xxxi.) of the Constitution invalidates the legislation because it
amounts to or includes an acquisition of property upon terms that are not just cannot, in my
opinion, be supported. It depends upon the view that under the Act the prices of drugs or
medicines supplied by the chemists in pursuance of the legislation are fixed by the executive
and may be so fixed quite arbitrarily. I think that we must treat prices fixed by the regulations
as fixed by law. It is not like an attempt to authorize an assessment by the executive or an
agent of the executive of the compensation for or value of property which may be
compulsorily taken. If therefore the power of making laws with respect to the acquisition of
property which s. 51 (xxxi.) confers is needed to support the provisions concerning the supply
of drugs prescribed, then I think the matter must be dealt with in much the same way as if the
Parliament itself were to provide by statute for the acquisition of property and at the same
time to name the compensation in the statute. In such a case, I apprehend, the validity of the
statute would depend on the fairness in fact of the compensation named. It would be
incumbent upon the Court to determine as a matter of fact whether the sum named afforded
just terms. (at p270)

26. Here there has been no attempt to show that the prices the Pharmaceutical Tariff would
provide would in fact be inadequate or unfair. But however that may be I do not think that the


-----

provisions of the legislation governing the supply of prescribed medicines, materials or
appliances by chemists amount to a law with respect to the acquisition of property within the
meaning of s. 51 (xxxi.). The view has been expressed that s. 51 (xxxi.) covers voluntary
acquisition. The view has also been expressed that it covers acquisitions of property
authorized by Federal law even although the property is not acquired by the Commonwealth
(McClintock v. The Commonwealth [1947] HCA 39; (1947) 75 CLR 1 ). No doubt if you
combine these views a dialectical argument may be constructed to support the conclusion that
as the acquisition of the medicine from the chemist by the customer is authorized by
Commonwealth law s. 51 (xxxi.) must apply. But it is a synthetic argument, and in my
opinion is unreal. The first view means that an acquisition by the Commonwealth may be
authorized under the power, whether the acquisition be voluntary or compulsory. The second
view means that a compulsory acquisition under Federal law for a purpose in respect of
which the Parliament has the power to make laws must be referred to s. 51 (xxxi.) and must
comply with the condition concerning just terms. There is here no compulsory acquisition by
the customer of the drugs he obtains from the chemist when he presents a medical
prescription. The chemist is legally free to supply them or not as he pleases. I do not think
that the risk he may run of his approval being revoked if he refuses, or the business
consequences of the revocation, can make the acquisition compulsory. Its legal character is a
voluntary sale. The protection which s. 51 (xxxi.) gives to the owner of property is wide. It
cannot be broken down or avoided by indirect means. But it is a protection to property and
not to the general commercial and economic position occupied by traders. The essence of a
chemist's relation to the plan is that, as a trader, he must decide whether at the prices fixed by
the Commonwealth he will or will not supply a commodity which he buys and sells, the law
having brought about a situation in which it is likely that there will be little or no other trade
for him in that commodity. If the prices are too low he may suffer in his trade, but that is not
within the protection of s. 51 (xxxi.). But it does not appear to me that it is a case of taking
his property from him against his will without just compensation. (at p271)

27. So far I have dealt with the legislation as it governs the supply by pharmaceutical
chemists of medicines and materials and appliances. I have done so because that is the
principal concern of the Act. But there are provisions dealing with the supply of drugs in
hospitals and by medical practitioners in districts where there is no chemist and for special
arrangements for isolated areas and more generally. I do not refer to the particular sections
and clauses relating to the dispensaries of friendly societies and the like because they do not
seem to be more than special cases of the supply by pharmaceutical chemists. (at p271)

28. Some consideration, however, must be given to the supply of pharmaceutical benefits by
medical practitioners and to the special arrangements affecting them and for the supply of
pharmaceutical benefits in hospitals, although I think that the invalidity of those provisions
could not bring down the rest of the Act and regulations. (at p271)

29. As to the first, s. 11 provides that where there is no approved pharmaceutical chemist in a
particular area, the Director-General may approve a medical practitioner practising in the area
for the purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits. It then provides that they shall be
supplied by him in accordance with the regulations. Two points arise on the section. The first
is whether the Director-General may fix upon a medical practitioner and approve him without
his consent and against his will. I think not. The provision is perhaps defectively drawn but I
think the word "approve" implies that the function for which he is to be approved is one that
the medical practitioner seeks to fulfil. The second point is whether a duty to supply the
medicines &c. is imposed upon the approved practitioner. Again I think not. The word "shall"


-----

is directed not to the words "be supplied" but to the phrase "in accordance with such
conditions as are prescribed." It would be a great burden to impose upon a medical
practitioner in a remote area if he were placed under a legal duty of having available for
supply everything that might ultimately be covered by the formulary and the addendum.
Section 15 (1) is a somewhat indefinitely worded provision authorizing the Minister to make
special arrangements to provide that an adequate service in lieu of all or any of the benefits
provided by the Act would be available in isolated areas or under special conditions. Subsection (2) says that the provisions of any special arrangements made in accordance with subs. (1) shall have effect notwithstanding any provisions of the Act inconsistent therewith. It is
suggested that this gives the Minister an anomalous coercive authority exerciseable by
making "arrangements," an authority bounded only by the subject matter. I think that this
misconstrues the provision. The Minister, in my opinion, is given no coercive powers. He
must make arrangements which are voluntary in character, but he is not bound to conform to
the general requirements of the Act and his "arrangements" may be, therefore, inconsistent
with the plan laid down elsewhere in the Act. It is plain on the face of s. 16 that only
contractual arrangements are contemplated by that particular provision. I see no reason to
doubt its validity. (at p272)

30. The Act distinguishes between public and private hospitals. A patient occupying a bed in
a public ward in a public hospital is excepted from persons entitled to pharmaceutical
benefits: s. 7 (1). The power to make regulations includes authority to prescribe the hospitals
or the classes of hospitals which shall be deemed to be public hospitals for the purpose of the
Act: s. 23 (d). The governing body of a public hospital and the proprietor of a private hospital
are called hospital authorities. A Minister of a State may be declared the governing body of
the public hospitals of the State: s. 4 (1) and (3). A hospital authority may apply for approval
to supply pharmaceutical benefits to patients receiving treatment in or at the hospital of which
it is the governing body or proprietor. The application must say who will dispense or supply
the pharmaceutical benefits on behalf of the hospital: s. 12. The approved hospital authority is
then entitled to payment from the Commonwealth in accordance with the regulations in
respect of the supply of pharmaceutical benefits to the patients but no payment is to be made
under this provision in respect of a patient occupying a bed in a public ward in a public
hospital: s. 14 (3) and (4). The approved hospital authority takes the place of the approved
pharmaceutical chemist. It supplies the medicines, materials and appliances covered by the
formulary and addendum and claims payment from the Commonwealth. But in the
arrangements for payment a distinction exists between public hospitals and private or it
would be better to say hospitals not defined as public. Subject to the satisfaction of the
Director-General as to the adequacy of the provision of pharmaceutical benefits by a public
hospital, the approved authority of the hospital is to receive payment fixed on a basis "which
will result in payments covering as nearly as practicable the cost to approved public hospitals
in the State concerned of supplying the pharmaceutical benefits." It is fixed by the Federal
Treasurer after consultation with the State Treasurer: reg. 32. Since the payment is made
under such an arrangement, the regulations provide that a medical practitioner shall not write
a prescription in respect of the treatment of a person in or at an approved public hospital upon
a prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth: reg. 33. In other hospitals the medical
practitioner must, according to s. 7A, write prescriptions for formulary medicines and
materials and appliances on Commonwealth forms. A prescription must be presented to an
approved hospital authority if he is the proprietor of a private hospital: reg. 12. Putting aside
s. 7A, there is not in my opinion any ground apart from those already dealt with for saying
these provisions fall outside the power to make laws with respect to the provision of
pharmaceutical benefits. But it is only in public hospitals that the hospital medical attendants


-----

need not use Commonwealth forms for medicines and materials and appliances listed in the
formulary or addendum. Curiously enough "public hospital" is defined in a way that excludes
hospitals conducted by the States themselves. The definition is made by the regulations
pursuant to the power already mentioned. To be a public hospital the institution must be in
receipt of a grant for maintenance from a State and must be certified to be a public hospital
by the State Minister concerned: reg. 2 (3). It is pointed out for the State of Victoria
intervening, that State mental hospitals, gaol hospitals, police hospitals and other State
hospitals, sanatoria and clinics do not "receive grants for maintenance" and must therefore
fall outside the definition. Consequently the medical officers are not relieved from the
necessity, if s. 7A is valid, of prescribing upon Commonwealth forms, if they prescribe
anything falling within the formulary or the addendum. In any case even if the medical
officers of such institutions were relieved by the regulations from so doing, it would remain
true that by the terms of s. 7A of the Act they were required so to use Commonwealth forms,
and only by the regulation-making power were they excepted. I agree that if the effect of the
provisions is to require State medical officers in the course of their State duties to use
Commonwealth forms, although the State institutions in which they act are not approved and
no payment is or could be claimed from the Commonwealth for the medicines the State
provides for the patient, the provisions would probably go too far and so pro tanto would
exceed power. The effect as an interference with the conduct of the institution is perhaps
exaggerated. The point seems to be, however, that in its application to the circumstances
suggested the imposition upon the State medical officers of an obligation to conform to s. 7A
and reg. 11 is not connected with the provision of benefits. But again I cannot see how such
an excess of power would destroy the whole Act. (at p274)

31. For the foregoing reasons I think that, excluding, for separate consideration, s. 7A and the
provisions of the regulations affecting the mode of prescribing what is covered by the
formulary and addendum and the fulfilment of the prescription, the legislation, in all respects
material to this case, is valid. (at p274)

32. The whole case in my opinion is reduced to the question whether s. 7A, considered with
the provisions of the regulations I have mentioned, is valid. This question may be divided
into two. First is it a law with respect to providing pharmaceutical benefits or, perhaps,
medical services? Second does it involve a form of civil conscription? (at p274)

33. I have stated the first question without distinguishing between the principal power
contained in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) and the incidental power. I have done so because I have no doubt
that the principal power includes within it everything which is incidental to the subject
matter. "It is a fundamental principle of the Constitution that everything necessary to the
exercise of a power is included in the grant of a power. Everything necessary to the effective
exercise of a power of legislation must, therefore, be taken to be conferred by the
Constitution with that power" - per O'Connor J., (Baxter v. Ah Way [1909] HCA 30; (1909)
8 CLR 626, at p 637 ). It goes further than "necessary"; "things which are incidental to it, and
which may reasonably and properly be done and against which no express prohibition is
found, may and ought, prima facie, to follow from the authority for effectuating the main
purpose by proper and general means" - per Lord Selborne, (Small v. Smith (1884) 10 App
Cas 119, at p 129 ). Here we are concerned with what is incidental to the subject matter rather
than with some matter which arises in or attends the execution of the power of legislation
over the subject matter and so would itself be a subject of legislative power under s. 51
(xxxix.). The distinction is stated in Le Mesurier v. Connor (1929) 42 CLR, at p 497 . (at
p274)


-----

34. It is I think, within the scope of the power with respect to the provision of pharmaceutical
benefits, understood according to these principles, to prescribe conditions governing the right
to obtain medicines from chemists at the cost of the Commonwealth and the right of the
chemist to obtain payment from the Commonwealth, the procedure to be followed, including
the documentation and records, and the machinery for administering the plan. Thus it is
within power to make a medical prescription indispensable to the right to obtain free
medicines. It is within it to provide, for administrative convenience, that a prescription should
not suffice unless written upon an official form. It is within it to make up and furnish to
medical practitioners and chemists a list of uncompounded medicines and formulae for
medicinal compounds. To do so serves, I take it, the purposes of limiting the medicines to be
supplied at government cost, of providing a system of references for the use of the medical
practitioner, the chemist and administrative officers and of facilitating the preparation and use
of a pharmaceutical tariff. It is more doubtful whether it is within the scope of the power to
provide, as reg. 31 (2) in effect does, that if a particular trade mark, brand, make or
proprietary equivalent of something contained in the formulary is prescribed, the chemist
shall not be bound to supply the pharmaceutical benefit in that form and if he does he shall be
paid no more than the rate of the Pharmaceutical Tariff. This, I think, exceeds power if and in
so far as it purports to relieve the chemist of responsibility to the patient for supplying
something which is not prescribed, if on any medical ground it can be distinguished from
what is prescribed. Whether it does so is a question which, I presume, must depend upon the
possible operation the clause may have upon prescriptions for particular compounds now
specified in the formulary scheduled to the regulations. It is a question that cannot be decided
without information and explanation, which are beyond the limits of judicial notice. It is a
matter which it is neither possible nor necessary to decide at present. It is not necessary to do
so because it does not affect the validity of the main provisions. (at p275)

35. Then comes the last legislative step, the step taken by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Acts
1949, of imposing upon medical practitioners the obligation of using a Commonwealth form
if they prescribe anything in the formulary. Why is not this further legislative step also a law
with respect to the providing of pharmaceutical benefits? I find it impossible to say that it is
not such a law. The duty it purports to impose of writing a prescription for a medicine in the
formulary not otherwise than on a prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth touches
directly the plan for providing pharmaceutical benefits. It is nothing to the point that some
other plan might have been adopted. Doubtless the legislature might have reconsidered the
question of the necessity of a form of prescription. It might have decided that any written
prescription would suffice. But it took the opposite view. (at p275)

36. The question whether s. 7A is a law with respect to the subject matter is one of relevance
not of policy. Since the intended operation of the section is to secure the use of the machinery
and procedure which, ex hypothesi, has been constitutionally established, it is not easy to see
how it could be said to go beyond the subject matter. Possibly in the absence of sub-s. (2) (a)
an argument might have been available. That argument would have been that there was no
means by which the "benefit" could be renounced or avoided, and to give a man what he
wishes to disclaim is outside the power. To exclude the possibility of a man buying for
himself his own medicine, doubtless would be beyond the power. Indeed, it has been argued
that sub-s. (2) (a) does not suffice to preserve to persons of tender years or of insufficient
mental capacity or enfeebled by illness or age, the privilege of rejecting the "pharmaceutical"
benefit and therefore sub-s. (1) goes too far. In such a case the prescription in respect of that
person must have been written at the request of someone and the subsection allows the latter
to request that it shall not be written on a Commonwealth form. In any event, the argument


-----

that to provide medicaments for a person in such a condition is not to provide a
pharmaceutical benefit is untenable. (at p276)

37. It is suggested that reg. 11A might be repealed and that then s. 7A would make possible
an attempt to control the conduct of any given medical practitioner by withholding from him
a supply of forms so that he could not carry on his practice. This suggestion overlooks the
plain implication of s. 7A namely, that its operation is conditional upon a supply of forms
being made available by the Commonwealth. (at p276)

38. There remains the final question. Does s. 7A in itself or with the regulations amount to a
form of civil conscription? In the consideration of this difficult question, it is important to be
clear what duty the medical man is required to perform when it arises and what is its essential
nature. The duty is to use a government form in prescribing: to write it in duplicate: to
indicate what he prescribes by its title in the formulary, adding any permitted variation he
thinks proper: to draw a line: to date the prescription and to sign it. The duty only arises when
the practitioner has decided to prescribe. He is placed under no duty to attend the patient or to
prescribe. Further, it is only when he decides upon a prescription that is in the formulary,
with or without a variation described in reg. 4 (3), that the duty attaches. The formulary and
the permitted variations cover a wide field and doubtless it would not be possible to carry on
practice without frequently using formulary prescriptions. But it is the fact that a prescription
for what is not contained in the formulary, or I think for a variation which is not "permitted"
of what is contained therein, neither need nor ought to be written on the Commonwealth
form. (at p277)

39. Now as to the essential nature of this duty. It serves the patient only in respect of his
pocket. It provides him with a document enabling him to obtain the medicine free. It serves
the Commonwealth in respect of its administration of the scheme. Prescribing is a part of
medical service. The service is to the patient. There is no compulsion to render this service.
But there is a compulsion as to the formalities to be observed when the prescription is set
down as a direction for the chemist. In the course of a day's practice by a busy medical man,
these formalities would, no doubt, be repeated many times. The necessity of indicating what
he prescribes by its title in the formulary and of using a Commonwealth prescription form for
formulary medicines would cast upon him the burden of turning up the formulary until he
acquired a sufficient familiarity with its contents. (at p277)

40. That being the extent and nature of the obligation sought to be placed upon him it is
perhaps desirable to pause to inquire whether it amounts to a compulsory medical service.
The point of this inquiry, stated in that form, lies in the circumstance that the bracketed words
in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) qualify only medical and dental services. In strict accuracy I think that it is
not a medical service that is made compulsory. It is a procedure in performing an incident of
medical service that is made compulsory and it is done in order to effect a non-medical
purpose. The power under which it is done is in my opinion not to legislate with respect to
providing medical services but with respect to providing pharmaceutical benefits. But this
perhaps is not decisive because if it amounts to a form of civil conscription there may be an
implication against imposing it even under the power with respect to the provision of
pharmaceutical benefits. (at p277)

41. The difficulty I have in regarding the foregoing obligations as amounting to a form of
civil conscription consists in their incidental character. They comprise only the pursuit of an
appointed procedure, the observance of formalities: the adherence to a terminology or mode


-----

of indication. The burden of these things may be great. They may cause much embarrassment
and involve a restriction upon the freedom or flexibility, and an impairment of the facility,
with which prescriptions are selected or composed, and written. But however burdensome the
consequences may prove, it is still true that what is required is adherence to a specific course
in a particular act incidental to medical practice. Now the expression "civil conscription"
cannot be equivalent simply to compulsion. If the qualification consisted in the words "but
not so as to authorize any form of compulsion," there could be little doubt that s. 7A would
fall within it. (at p278)

42. It is difficult indeed to say with confidence what is essential to the meaning of the
expression "any form of civil conscription," to ascribe to the expression any definite
requirement as part of its connotation. But compulsion to serve seems to be inherent in the
notion conveyed by the words. No doubt the service may be irregular or intermittent. A duty
to give medical attention to outpatients at a hospital for two hours once a fortnight if imposed
by law would no doubt be a form of civil conscription. It need not involve the relation of
employer and employee. A law imposing an obligation to perform medical services for
patients at a practitioner's own rooms would doubtless be bad as involving a form of civil
conscription. But I cannot escape the conviction that a wide distinction exists between on the
one hand a regulation of the manner in which an incident of medical practice is carried out, if
and when it is done, and on the other hand the compulsion to serve medically or to render
medical services. The former does not appear to me within the conception; the latter does.
Section 7A and reg. 11 amount to no more than a regulation of the manner in which
prescriptions shall be given, if and when they are given, that is prescriptions for anything on
the list. The end in view is not medical but financial and administrative. There is no
compulsion to serve as a medical man, to attend patients, to render medical services to
patients, or to act in any other medical capacity, whether regularly or occasionally, over a
period of time, however short, or intermittently. (at p278)

43. I am unable to agree that it is enough that what is made obligatory is an act in the course
of medical practice. The law which makes it an offence to write a prescription without dating
and signing it and placing thereon the address of the medical practitioner could hardly be
called a form of civil conscription and I do not see that the purpose to be served would make
any difference. I do not underrate the importance and the extent of the words "any form," but
it must be a form of civil conscription. In my opinion that vague expression is not satisfied by
what is required by s. 7A and reg. 11. In my opinion s. 7A is valid. I think too that reg. 11 is
valid. I am of opinion that the demurrer should be allowed. (at p279)

McTIERNAN J. The demurrer to the statement of claim is founded upon s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth. The subjects of this paragraph were brought within the
range of Commonwealth power under the name of "social services." This appears from the
title of the Act namely "Constitution Alteration (Social Services) 1946" which inserted par.
(xxiiiA.) in s. 51 of the Constitution. Section 51 (xxiiiA.) gives power to the Parliament to
legislate with respect to the provision of various matters, including "benefits." One of the
subjects of this legislative power is the provision of pharmaceutical benefits. The power to
legislate with respect to this subject is particularly relied upon to support the demurrer. It is
necessary to examine what is meant by pharmaceutical benefits. (at p279)

2. The material aid given pursuant to a scheme to provide for human wants is commonly
described by the word "benefit." When this word is applied to that subject matter it signifies a
pecuniary aid, service, attendance or commodity made available for human beings under


-----

legislation designed to promote social welfare or security: the word is also applied to such
aids made available through a benefit society to members or their dependants. The word
"benefits" in par. (xxiiiA.) has a corresponding or similar meaning. (at p279)

3. The words "the provision" with which s. 51 (xxiiiA.) begins, the nature of the assistance
which may be provided under this new legislative power, the classification of the items as
social services made by the Act which inserted the power in the Constitution, raise, in my
opinion, a necessary implication that the words "the provision" mean the provision by the
Commonwealth. Further, in my opinion, the words "the provision," would not justify a law
providing for the compulsory receipt of any payment, benefit or service. The present Act,
however, makes the receipt of a pharmaceutical benefit optional. The power of the
Commonwealth is not limited to the provision of social services to the extent only that a gap
is left by State or private action. The power does not extend to the extrusion of a State or any
private person or association from any field of charity or welfare work. The present Act of
course does not attempt to do so. There may be a question which it would be necessary to
resolve under s. 109 of the Constitution, if a Commonwealth law within s. 51 (xxiiiA.) and a
State law pursued similar plans of social welfare. (at p279)

4. Although the intention of par. (xxiiiA.) is to give the Commonwealth power to undertake
certain plans of social welfare or security, the power is more than facultative. It is within the
limits of the subject matter, a plenary legislative power. Subject to the condition respecting
any form of civil conscription, which at any rate applies to the provision by the
Commonwealth of either medical or dental services, any compulsory or non-compulsory law
may be made if relevant to the subject matter or if it is incidental to the execution of the
power: in the latter case the law would be justified by s. 51 (xxxix.). (at p280)

5. The Commonwealth Parliament derives lawful authority from par. (xxiiiA.) to appropriate
the revenue to the purposes mentioned in the paragraph. These are plainly "purposes of the
Commonwealth" upon any view of the scope of that phrase in s. 81 of the Constitution. The
power vested by par. (xxiiiA.) covers a wider field than matters incidental to the execution of
the power to appropriate revenue for those purposes. It is a plenary legislative power to make
laws with respect to the provision by the Commonwealth of any of the matters specified in
the paragraph. (at p280)

6. The grant of legislative power made by the insertion of par. (xxiiiA.) in s. 51 of the
Constitution includes a power which the Court in Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The
Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30; (1945) 71 CLR 237 said it was necessary for Parliament to
have to enable it to pass the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1944. (at p280)

7. The plan pursued by that Act and the present Act is that the Commonwealth pays for the
medicine obtained at a pharmaceutical chemist's shop by any person who is in need of it. The
payment by the Commonwealth for the medicine is action within the scope of the words "the
provision of pharmaceutical benefits". (at p280)

8. The provisions of the present Act and Regulations have been expounded in preceding
reasons for judgment. It is unnecessary to repeat them. All these provisions are relevant and
appropriate to the plan the legislature has adopted to provide pharmaceutical benefits. Each of
these provisions may be justified either by the power to make laws with respect to the
provision of pharmaceutical benefits or the power in s. 51 (xxxix.) to make laws with respect
to matters incidental to the execution of the former power. This conclusion follows inevitably


-----

from the reasons given in Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30;
(1945) 71 CLR 237 . It will be necessary, however, to refer specially to s. 7A of the present
Act. (at p280)

9. The plan of the Act is that the medicines, materials and appliances mentioned in s. 6 should
be the subjects of the benefits provided by the Act. These goods are described in s. 6 as
pharmaceutical benefits. They are such in a secondary sense. The benefit consists in
obtaining any of them without cost. In order to obtain it as a benefit it must be obtained in
accordance with the Act and the regulations. (at p281)

10. The power being plenary legislative power, there is an end to the objection that only
eleemosynary provision in harmony with State laws and administration is authorized. To be a
patient in a State hospital or an inmate of a State institution is not a constitutional obstacle to
the receipt of Commonwealth pharmaceutical benefits. (at p281)

11. Section 6 cannot be held to be invalid because the Parliament has not deferred to State
laws applying to goods ordinarily obtained at pharmacies or dispensaries. (at p281)

12. This section ought not to be construed as a power to draw up a formulary composed of
any goods whatsoever regardless of the consideration that to make them available in
accordance with the Act would not be to provide "a pharmaceutical benefit." The rule of
interpretation is to read the section subject to the constitutional power. It does not give
authority to include anything which may not be provided by way of a benefit which is in
reality a "pharmaceutical benefit." "Materials and appliances" are mentioned in s. 6 (b). This
classification is adopted for goods which are not medicines. They are goods which have a
therapeutic value for human beings. They are not necessarily outside the broad class of
pharmaceutical goods. It must be remembered that there is a condition in the Act that nothing
can be obtained by way of a pharmaceutical benefit except upon the prescription of a medical
practitioner. (at p281)

13. The question which it is necessary to consider is whether any material or appliance,
something not medicine in the ordinary meaning of the word, but such as a doctor would
prescribe for the treatment of a human being, and is obtainable at a chemist's shop or a
dispensary, is not capable of being provided as a pharmaceutical benefit for the person for
whom it is prescribed, because of the limitation imposed by the word "pharmaceutical."
Going upon common experience, this question cannot be answered absolutely in the
affirmative. Section 6 (1) (b) should be construed to refer to materials and appliances which
may be provided validly under the power. It extends also to the provision of sickness
benefits. (at p281)

14. The most controversial provisions of the Act and the regulations from the constitutional
point of view are s. 7A and reg. 11. It is argued that these provisions are beyond the powers
affirmatively given by s. 51 (xxiiiA.) and also collide with the condition withholding power
to authorize any form of civil conscription. (at p281)

15. This condition cannot by reason of its place in par. (xxiiiA.) apply to a law providing
"benefits to students" and "family allowances". Its place in the paragraph raises the question
whether it applies only to the provision of medical and dental services and nothing else or to
the provision of any matter in the paragraph which precedes the condition. They are
maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical,


-----

sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services. It would seem odd to say that
there is power to make a law with respect to the provision of maternity allowances "but not so
as to authorize any form of civil conscription." And if the condition applies to that subject
matter it would appear to be odd that it is not made to apply to "family allowances." Clearly it
does not apply to that subject matter. If the construction that the condition applies only to the
provision of medical and dental services is not adopted, the only alternative construction is
that it applies to every subject matter beginning with maternity allowances down to medical
services. This alternative construction would bring the idea of conscription into association
with matters with which it is not naturally or logically connected. I think that the key to the
interpretation of the paragraph is that the idea of conscription cannot naturally be associated
with the provision of anything in the paragraph except the services which are mentioned; they
are medical and dental services. The condition immediately follows the words "medical and
dental services." In my opinion it should not be annexed to anything before the word
"medical." There is no comma between dental services and the first of the brackets enclosing
the condition: there is a comma at the end of the second bracket. The words "medical and
dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription)" are a separate
branch of the legislative power conferred by the paragraph. No other branch of the power is
qualified by the condition. In this view the Parliament is equipped with power to legislate
with respect to the provision of pharmaceutical benefits unfettered by the condition with
respect to conscription. (at p282)

16. "The provision" in s. 51 (xxiiiA.) means the provision by the Commonwealth. The
condition comes into play in connection with the provision of medical and dental services by
the Commonwealth. The protection of the condition is not needed in connection with the
provision of medical and dental services by anybody else; because the legislative power
given by s. 51 (xxiiiA.) does not extend to that field. By the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act
1947-1949 the Commonwealth does not provide any medical service unless it does so under
ss. 15 and 16. It is clear from the terms of these sections that they depend upon the making of
voluntary arrangements: consequently the condition respecting civil conscription does not
affect their validity. But as the general plan of the Act does not include the provision by the
Commonwealth of any medical service, the plan cannot collide with this condition at any
point. (at p283)

17. The provisions of s. 8 relating to the presentation of a prescription written and signed by a
medical practitioner are clearly within power. But if medical practitioners were free to write
prescriptions on any paper or in any form or manner they pleased it is obvious, having regard
to the large number of prescriptions which would be presented to pharmaceutical chemists
throughout the Commonwealth, that the administration of the present plan would involve
great difficulties: because it is necessary in order to carry out the present plan for the officers
of the Commonwealth to examine the prescriptions upon which the chemists supplied the
goods for which they claim payment: the prescription is the chemist's title to payment. Its
form is one of the concomitants of the plan. The compulsory direction which is contained in
s. 7A is therefore within the power to legislate with respect to the provision of pharmaceutical
benefits. (at p283)

18. Section 7A would, however, be valid if, contrary to the view already expressed in these
reasons for judgment, the condition with respect to civil conscription applies to the provision
of pharmaceutical benefits. (at p283)


-----

19. The word "conscription" standing by itself generally means military conscription. The
term "conscription" does not refer to the compulsion of soldiers to serve but to the form
employed to compel civilians to be soldiers. The volunteer is bound to obey orders. But
volunteers and conscripts, although equally bound to obey orders, are different classes.
Conscription is not equivalent to compulsion. It means not the compulsion to serve but the
form employed by the State to place a person under a duty to serve. To compel a civilian in
time of war to darken the windows of his house is not to conscript him. It is not conscription
to require him to fill in and sign a census return giving information required by the
Government for defence purposes. The words "civil conscription" mean conscription for civil
purposes. The words "any form" do not extend the meaning of conscription beyond its
ordinary meaning. The "form" must be a form of conscription. Any form of civil conscription
does not mean any form of compulsion or control of conduct. The condition in par. (xxiiiA.)
with respect to civil conscription is aimed at the passing of a law which by any form
conscribes a person into the service of the Commonwealth. Practical necessity or moral duty
is not conscription. In war time a citizen is under the practical necessity and the moral duty of
giving aid to his country. If he acts under such compulsion he is nevertheless a volunteer. (at
p284)

20. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Act does not by any form of law call any doctor to serve the
Commonwealth: it does not attach any medical practitioner to the service of the
Commonwealth. No doctor is any less a private practitioner than he was immediately before
the Act was passed. In the circumstances in which s. 7A applies, the doctor is directed to
write a prescription in the manner prescribed by the Act. The doctor is legally free to decline
to write any prescription if he objects to writing it in that form. If he observes the direction
the writing of the prescription is done in the course of his private practice. Compliance with
the direction does not in any degree change his status from that of private practitioner to
Commonwealth servant. A State law commanding a doctor to sign a prescription or to date it
would not engage the doctor in the service of the State. It does not impose a form of
conscription. Section 7A regulates or controls the form in which a prescription written
entirely in the course of private practice must be written. The section does not provide for any
form of civil conscription. (at p284)

21. It is doubtful whether the interest of the plaintiffs entitle them to claim that s. 13 is invalid
or that the Act and the regulations operate to acquire from chemists the goods supplied by
them to the recipients of pharmaceutical benefits but not upon just terms. Section 13 gives a
chemist an appeal to the Supreme Court of a State or Territory against the removal or
suspension of his approval. In this action it does not appear to be necessary to pass any
opinion on these claims: but it is not to be implied that I have any reason to doubt that s. 13 is
valid or that the condition as to just terms is fully observed. (at p284)

22. The plan for the provision of pharmaceutical benefits which is embodied in this Act and
the regulations, in my opinion, does not overpass the limits of the legislative powers which s.
51 (xxiiiA.) vests in the Parliament and there is no contravention of the condition with respect
to civil conscription. (at p284)

23. I should allow the demurrer. (at p284)

WILLIAMS J. The question at issue on this demurrer is whether the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Act 1947-1949, or alternatively certain sections of and regulations made under this Act, are a
valid exercise of the power conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament by s. 51, par.


-----

(xxiiiA.) of the Constitution to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth with respect to "The provision of maternity allowances, widows' pensions,
child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical
and dental services (but not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription), benefits to
students and family allowances." This paragraph was inserted in the Constitution pursuant to
s. 128 of the Constitution. The proposed law which was submitted to the electors pursuant to
this section, approved by the necessary majorities, and assented to on 19th December 1946,
was the Constitution Alteration (Social Services), Act No. 81 of 1946. At the same
referendum further proposed laws were submitted to the electors but were not approved by
the necessary majorities. One of these proposed laws was the Constitution Alteration
(Industrial Employment) 1946. This proposed to alter s. 51 of the Constitution by inserting
after par. (xxxiv.) the following paragraph - "(xxxivA.) Terms and conditions of employment
in industry, but not so as to authorize any form of industrial conscription." (at p285)

2. The reason for the insertion of the new paragraph (xxiiiA.) in the Constitution is common
ground. In Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30; (1945) 71 CLR
237 the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1944, the predecessor with an important difference of
the present Act, was declared to be invalid by Latham C.J., Rich J., Starke J., Dixon J. and
myself, McTiernan J. dissenting. The power relied upon to support the constitutional validity
of this Act was the power of appropriation in s. 81 of the Constitution. This section provides "All revenues or moneys raised or received by the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth shall form one Consolidated Revenue Fund, to be appropriated for the
purposes of the Commonwealth in the manner and subject to the charges and liabilities
imposed by this Constitution." The reasons for judgment in Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The
Commonwealth [1945] HCA 30; (1945) 71 CLR 237 disclosed a division of opinion as to the
meaning of the words "for the purposes of the Commonwealth" in s. 81 of the Constitution.
Latham C.J. and McTiernan J. thought that the purposes could be any purposes determined
by the Commonwealth Parliament. Starke J. thought that the purposes could only be the
purposes of the Commonwealth as "an organized political body, with legislative, executive
and judicial functions, whatever is incidental thereto, and the status of the Commonwealth as
a Federal Government" (1945) 71 CLR, at p 266 . I was substantially of the same opinion.
Dixon J. did not find it necessary finally to decide judicially between these two views, but
(1945) 71 CLR, at p 269 indicated that in the past he had not entertained the view that s. 81 of
the Constitution empowered the Parliament to expend money for any purpose that was for the
benefit of the people of the Commonwealth. Rich J. was in substantial agreement with the
reasons of Dixon J., from which it would appear that he also had not in the past entertained
this view. (at p286)

3. It was therefore likely, if the point arose for decision, that the majority of the Court would
hold that the only form of social services upon which the Commonwealth could lawfully
expend its moneys were those expressly authorized by the Constitution, that is invalid and old
age pensions which are authorized by s. 51 par. (xxiii.), and that the Acts authorizing
payments for maternity allowances, child endowment and widows' pensions were invalid. (at
p286)

4. Accordingly, the main purpose of the alteration of the Constitution now embodied in s. 51
par. (xxiiiA.) was to empower the Commonwealth Parliament to legislate to spend its moneys
on a wider range of social services than those authorized by s. 51, par. (xxiii.). The new
paragraph is of course plenary in its fullest sense and must, like every other legislative power
in the Constitution, be given a wide and liberal interpretation. It contains eleven separate


-----

heads of legislative power. These heads may to some extent overlap, but there is no reason
why the paragraph, because it is part of the Constitution, should not be construed so as to
make it a consistent enactment and to give a meaning if possible to every part of it, Bank of
New South Wales v. The Commonwealth [1948] HCA 7; (1948) 76 CLR 1, at pp 256, 257 .
It is important to discover at the outset the heads to which the expression in parenthesis "but
not so as to authorize any form of civil conscription" applies. There is a comma after the
words "hospital benefits" and a further comma after the words "civil conscription" so that the
punctuation tends to confine the expression to the words "medical and dental services,"
(Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing v. Collins [1925] HCA 25; (1925) 36 CLR 410,
at p 421 ) and this is in my opinion the true intent of the paragraph. If the expression was
meant to apply to all the preceding words, it would only be natural to expect that it would
also be made to apply to the succeeding words "benefits to students and family allowances,"
because medical and dental services could be provided as part of such benefits and
allowances just as readily as they could be provided as part of the preceding allowances and
benefits. It would appear therefore that the other heads of legislative power in the new
paragraph are not subject to the expression. This may well have been thought to be
unnecessary because a legislative power to provide allowances, pensions, endowments, and
benefits points strongly to a power which is intended to be exercised by the Commonwealth
itself providing such allowances &c. in cash or in kind, and not to a power to make or compel
a State or some private individual to provide the benefit. But it is unnecessary to express a
final opinion because the express inclusion of medical and dental services in the paragraph
clearly indicates to my mind that whenever such services are provided whether as services
exclusively or in the course of providing some other benefit, the law must not authorize any
form of civil conscription of such services. (at p287)

5. The expression is a prohibition upon the exercise of the legislative powers of the
Commonwealth under par. (xxiiiA.) of the same character as the prohibition contained in ss.
92 and 116 of the Constitution. It invalidates all legislation to which it applies. The words
"civil conscription" have no ordinary meaning in the English language. The ordinary meaning
of conscription is the compulsory enrolment of men (and now women) for service in the
military or naval (and now in the air) forces. But s. 5 (7) (a) of the National Security Act
1939 provided that nothing in this section should authorize the imposition of . . . any form of
industrial conscription, and this was presumably the origin of the same words in the proposed
new par. (xxxivA.) and led to the adoption of the words "civil conscription" in par. (xxiiiA.).
It would no doubt be a form of industrial conscription to compel persons by law to work in
industries whether the industries were carried on by the Commonwealth or its authorities or
by the States or their authorities or by private individuals. It would equally be a form of civil
conscription of medical or dental services to compel medical practitioners or dentists by law
to make their professional services as civilians available to the Commonwealth or its
authorities or the States or their authorities or to carry on their professions in particular
localities. Conscription as a word of general application would seem to signify compulsory as
opposed to voluntary service, so that the words "industrial conscription" would seem
naturally to connote compulsory as opposed to voluntary employment in industry, and the
expression "civil conscription of medical and dental services" naturally to connote the
compulsory as opposed to the voluntary exercise of such services in civil life. Accordingly, in
my opinion, the expression invalidates all legislation which compels medical practitioners or
dentists to provide any form of medical or dental service. (at p287)

6. The crucial question is whether s. 7A of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949 is
such a law. The text of the section, which was proclaimed to come into operation on 25th


-----

July 1949, is as follows "(1) Subject to this section, a medical practitioner shall not write, in
respect of a person entitled to receive pharmaceutical benefits, a prescription for - (a) an
uncompounded medicine the name of which, or a medicinal compound the formula of which,
is contained, or is deemed to be included in the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary;
or (b) a material or appliance the name of which is contained in the prescribed addendum to
the Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary, otherwise than on a prescription form
supplied by the Commonwealth for the purposes of this Act. Penalty: Fifty pounds. (2) The
last preceding subsection shall not apply - (a) in any case in which the person in respect of
whom, or at whose request, the prescription is written requests the medical practitioner not to
write the prescription on a prescription form supplied by the Commonwealth for the purposes
of this Act; or (b) in such other cases or circumstances as are prescribed." (at p288)

7. As the Attorney-General pointed out, the word "pharmacy" in its ordinary meaning
includes the preparation of medicines by pharmacists in accordance with the prescriptions of
physicians. This meaning will be found in dictionaries and decided cases, some of which are
cited in Unger v. Mason [1947] HCA 44; (1947) 74 CLR 557, at p 577 . The word has
however particular reference to the art or business of compounding and preparing medicines,
and the adjective "pharmaceutical" has become descriptive of chemists who are skilled in
such art with the addition of the word "registered" where registration is required under the
local law to carry on such a business. Chemists now compound and sell many medicines not
prescribed for particular patients by physicians, so that reference in the new paragraph to the
provision of pharmaceutical benefits would appear to be particularly applicable to
medicaments obtainable in a chemist's shop with or without the prescription of a physician.
The inclusion in the definition of "pharmaceutical benefits" in s. 6 of the Act of materials and
appliances included in an addendum to the formulary not being uncompounded medicines or
medicinal compounds would appear to extend the operation of the Act beyond
pharmaceutical benefits and to include sickness benefits, but a prescription on the form
supplied by the Commonwealth is just as necessary before a person ordinarily resident in
Australia will become entitled to such materials and appliances as it is before he will become
entitled to uncompounded medicines or medicinal compounds. (at p288)

8. The Acts of 1944 and 1947 did not seek to compel medical practitioners to write
prescriptions on Commonwealth forms. They were supplied with copies of the formulary and
with forms and requested to use the forms when a pharmaceutical benefit was prescribed. We
were told by the Attorney-General that the government believed that medical practitioners
would co-operate voluntarily and that it would not be necessary to use compulsion. It may
have been thought that patients would exercise a practical compulsion by urging practitioners
to use the forms so that they might become entitled to receive the pharmaceutical benefits.
But neither event happened and s. 7A was inserted in the principal Act by Acts Nos. 8 and 26
of 1949 to make the use of the Commonwealth forms compulsory. When a statute inflicts a
penalty for not doing an act, the penalty implies that there is a legal compulsion to do the act
in question (Redpath v. Allan (1872) LR 4 PC 511, at p 517 ). Section 7A therefore compels
a medical practitioner, who cannot obtain a request to the contrary from the person in respect
of whom or at whose request the prescription is written, to write the prescription on the forms
supplied by the Commonwealth. The Attorney-General submitted that the section does not
compel a medical practitioner to render any medical service, and that its whole effect is to
compel a medical practitioner to write the prescription on a particular piece of paper if he
decides, in the unfettered exercise of his discretion, that the patient requires treatment which
is included in the formulary. It was submitted that the subject matter of the legislation is not
the medical service of treating the patient, but merely the question of the use of a document


-----

for the particular purpose of enabling the patient to obtain the pharmaceutical benefits at or
from the premises of an approved chemist without payment. But this is not in my opinion the
true effect of the section. The scheme of the Act is to make the provision of a pharmaceutical
benefit conditional upon a medical practitioner prescribing particular treatment, so that in
prescribing that treatment the medical practitioner is rendering a medical service to the
Commonwealth. He is in effect certifying to the Commonwealth that the patient requires a
pharmaceutical benefit within the meaning of the Act. Section 16 of the Act provides that:
"The Minister may, on behalf of the Commonwealth, enter into an agreement (on such terms
as to remuneration, allowances and otherwise as he thinks fit) with a medical practitioner
providing that the services of the medical practitioner shall be available without charge to
members of the public for the purpose of furnishing prescriptions for the purposes of this
Act." This section describes as a medical service, the service which a practitioner provides
when he is compelled by s. 7A to write a prescription on a Commonwealth form. He is
compelled to render that service in the course of rendering a contractual service to his patient.
But it is a service which forms no part of the implied contract for services created by a patient
seeking the advice and treatment of a medical practitioner and the medical practitioner
examining the patient with a view to giving him advice and treatment. It is a compulsory
service to the Commonwealth for the purposes of the Act which is super-imposed upon the
contract of the parties. It is a compulsory service whether the obligation is absolute or
absolute unless performance is excused by the person in respect of whom or at whose request
the prescription is written. And the Attorney-General did not contend, rightly I think, that the
constitutional validity of s. 7A (1) was in any way strengthened by the presence of s. 7A (2).
When analysed, the submission of the defendants appears to imply that a law only authorizes
a form of civil conscription of medical services when it operates directly to compel medical
practitioners to work for some civil authority or in some particular locality or for some
particular class of patients, and that a law which merely compels medical practitioners to act
in some particular manner in the course of or as incidental to the carrying on of their
profession does not authorize any form of civil conscription. This submission, if accepted,
would mean that medical practitioners could be compelled in the course of their practice to
perform all sorts of medical duties as, for instance, to give certificates, keep records, and give
information, confidential or otherwise, about the health of their patients provided the
certificates &c. were reasonably incidental to the execution of a law with respect to the
provision of any of the allowances or benefits specified in the paragraph. In my opinion such
a submission unduly narrows the effect of the wide words "any form of" in the expression in
parenthesis. (at p290)

9. It is to be noted that the Act of 1947 did not repeat s. 22 of the Act of 1944 which provided
that a medical practitioner should not write a prescription in accordance with any prescribed
form unless he was satisfied, by personal examination of the person in respect of whom the
prescription was written, that the pharmaceutical benefit specified in the prescription was
necessary for the treatment of that person. In Attorney-General (Vict.) v. The Commonwealth
(1945) 71 CLR, at p 260 the Chief Justice said of this section that it "directly controls the
conduct of medical practitioners . . . this provision directly and compulsorily operates in
relation to medical practitioners by preventing them carrying on their practice as they may be
allowed to carry it on under the laws of the State." This was said of course before the
insertion of par. (xxiiiA.) in the Constitution. Section 7A of the present Act does not, like s.
22 of the Act of 1944, expressly provide that medical practitioners must make a personal
examination of their patient before writing a prescription, but it would be the duty of a
medical practitioner at common law to be satisfied that his patient required the
pharmaceutical benefit before prescribing it, and a statutory obligation similar to that


-----

imposed by s. 22 could be introduced by a regulation made under s. 23 of the present Act
which authorizes the Governor-General to make regulations . . . (b) making provision in
relation to the writing of prescriptions on prescription forms supplied by the Commonwealth
for the purposes of the Act. Section 7A of the present Act, like s. 22 of the Act of 1944,
"directly controls the conduct of medical practitioners" in carrying on their practice. Such
duties as giving certificates, keeping records, and giving information about the health of their
patients would all be duties to be performed by a medical practitioner in the course of
carrying on his profession as a civilian and a law which compelled him to perform them
would, in my opinion, authorize a form of civil conscription of his services. Obviously
legislation which infringed the prohibition could not be invalid under s. 51 par. (xxiiiA.) but
valid under the incidental power s. 51 par. (xxxix.) of the Constitution. For these reasons I am
of opinion that s. 7A is invalid. (at p291)

10. Other objections were raised to the validity of the Act but I find it unnecessary to discuss
them at this stage of the proceedings. They relate mainly to the position of pharmaceutical
chemists under the Act and no chemists are plaintiffs. The plaintiffs are confined to the
British Medical Association and certain medical practitioners. If s. 7A is declared to be
invalid the rest of the Act, if severable and valid, will operate so far as medical practitioners
are concerned on a voluntary basis. Section 11 (1) and 16 relate to medical practitioners. But
I do not read s. 11 (1) as authorizing the Director-General to approve a medical practitioner
for supplying pharmaceutical benefits against his will, and s. 16 merely authorizes the
Minister to make an agreement on behalf of the Commonwealth with a medical practitioner.
As at present advised therefore I do not think that the plaintiffs have any sufficient interest to
impeach the validity of the rest of the Act. (at p291)

11. On the ground that s. 7A is invalid I would overrule the demurrer, which is to the whole
of the statement of claim. (at p291)

WEBB J. The two most important questions that arise are as to (1) the meaning of par.
(xxiiiA.) of s. 51 of the Commonwealth Constitution; and (2) the validity of s. 7A of the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Act 1947-1949. (at p291)

2. As to (1): in my opinion par. (xxiiiA.) does not empower the Commonwealth Parliament to
do more than legislate for the provision by the Commonwealth itself of the allowances,
pensions, endowment, benefits and services to which it refers, and the provision may be of
money, goods or services, even in the case of "benefits"; but, as regards medical and dental
services at least, it does not authorize any form of civil conscription. As the paragraph is
punctuated the words in brackets excluding civil conscription qualify only "services" and not
"benefits." However, the Chief Justice gives strong reasons why the punctuation should be
disregarded and the words in brackets held to qualify "benefits"; but I find it unnecessary to
decide, and so I do not decide, that they do so. So far as medical services are incidental to the
provision of pharmaceutical benefits there is no power to conscript such services, as the
incidental power to legislate under par. (xxxix.) of s. 51 cannot be held to exceed the express
power given by par. (xxiiiA.). The Constitution states that medical and dental services shall
not be conscripted, and that is conclusive for all purposes. I do not understand that, because
the State of Victoria was given leave to intervene, it is necessary to decide whether the words
in brackets qualify "benefits." At all events I think it is not necessary to do so for determining
the rights of the plaintiff Council and doctors. (at p292)


-----

3. Then as to the meaning of the words in brackets, it was not submitted that civil
conscription meant the enlistment of persons for full-time service. During World War I.
"conscription" was employed to designate compulsory military service anywhere, including
service overseas; but during World War II. it was used in Commonwealth legislation to
describe any compulsory service in the armed forces or in industry. As to "civil conscription,"
I cannot remember hearing or seeing the term used until I saw it in the proposed law in the
terms of par. (xxiiiA.) passed by Parliament and subsequently submitted to the electors under
s. 128 of the Commonwealth Constitution. I think the electors would have taken the proposed
law to emphasize, in the use of the words "any form," that legislation for the provision of
benefits or services of the kind referred to could not authorize compulsory service of any
kind, at least in the provision of medical or dental services, either independently or as
incidental to pharmaceutical or other benefits, and that compulsion, to any extent or of any
nature, whether legal, by the imposition of penalties, or practical, by any other means, direct
or indirect, could not be authorized. To require a person to do something which he may
lawfully decline to do but only at the sacrifice of the whole or a substantial part of the means
of his livelihood would, I think, be to subject him to practical compulsion amounting to
conscription in the case of services required by Parliament to be rendered to the people. If
Parliament cannot lawfully do this directly by legal means it cannot lawfully do it indirectly
by creating a situation, as distinct from merely taking advantage of one, in which the
individual is left no real choice but compliance. (at p293)

4. As to (2), the validity of s. 7A: in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act as enacted after the par.
(xxiiiA.) became part of the Constitution and before July 1949, there was no compulsion of
any kind in respect of medical or dental services; but in July 1949, after the doctors had
declined to use the Commonwealth form in writing their prescriptions, and so prevented their
patients from obtaining the pharmaceutical benefits, the Act was amended to require, in a
new s. 7A, that a doctor should use the Commonwealth form if he prescribed anything in the
Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary or the addendum thereto, unless the patient
requested otherwise. The penalty for non-compliance was fixed at 50 pounds. In this way it
was sought to compel the doctors to do something which they were not prepared to do
voluntarily. But the learned Attorney-General submitted that a doctor, in putting the
prescription on the Commonwealth form instead of on his own paper, would not be
performing a medical service; that the medical service would be complete when the doctor
made up his mind what to prescribe; and that s. 7A operated on him only as from the time
when he proceeded to write the prescription. However, I think that "medical service" in par.
(xxiiiA.) is not limited to the exercise of the professional skill required to arrive at a
conclusion as to what should be prescribed, but extends to the writing of the prescription,
whether on the doctor's paper or on the Commonwealth form. Ordinarily the writing of a
prescription is a medical service. Taking the allegations in the statement of claim to be true
for the purposes of this demurrer, the position appears to be that, as every person residing in
Australia who is not a patient occupying a bed in a public hospital is entitled to the benefits
provided by the Act, and the great majority of the people of Australia are likely to want these
benefits, the doctors must treat them or lose a considerable part of their practice, if not the
whole of it; but if a doctor treats patients to retain his practice, then s. 7A requires him to sign
the Commonwealth form and renders him liable to a penalty of 50 pounds if he fails to do so.
This, in my opinion, imposes on doctors a compulsory medical service and is a form of civil
conscription within the meaning of par. (xxiiiA.). It may well appear that at present the doctor
is compelled to do very little in being required to use the Commonwealth form, but if it is
conceded that he may be compelled to do this on the ground that it is not the performance of
a medical service but merely a method of rendering it, he may also be compelled to do many


-----

other things on the same ground, such as attending at certain places during certain hours to
write prescriptions for the convenience of patients not confined to their homes. It is for
Parliament to stipulate the conditions attaching to its grant of benefits, but not by compelling
the doctors, under penalty as for an offence, to sign the required forms or be deprived of
practice; otherwise by fines or deprivation of practice the doctors could be controlled to any
extent as to their movements and time. Of course patients may be forced by the attitude of the
doctors to request that the Commonwealth form be not used; but the compulsion on the
doctors remains, although for the time being it is countered by a measure which, however
undesirable it may appear, is not unlawful. (at p294)

5. To reiterate: if s. 7A had not been enacted a patient requesting a doctor to write a
prescription on the Commonwealth form, which involves consulting and consideration of the
Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Formulary or its addendum or both, would request a service
which only a doctor can render, and which therefore is properly described as a medical
service. But when this service is made compulsory by a fine, or loss of practice to avoid the
fine, in the case of any patient, with few exceptions, who does not request that the
Commonwealth form be not used, then, having regard not only to the extent of the
professional work involved but to the almost unlimited number of persons entitled to insist on
the service at any time, it becomes, I think, not merely a compulsory service but a form of
civil conscription within any meaning that can be given to that expression which, if not quite
clear, was certainly intended to be comprehensive. It is civil conscription of doctors as
doctors. When Parliament comes between patient and doctor and makes the lawful
continuance of their relationship as such depend upon a condition, enforceable by fine, that
the doctor shall render the patient a special service, unless that service is waived by the
patient, it creates a situation that amounts to a form of civil conscription. This civil
conscription can be avoided, without any breach of the law, to the extent that the doctor
vacates the field of medicine, which, however, would involved, in many if not most cases, a
considerable loss of practice and of income. But it is still civil conscription. Military
conscription would not cease to be such because those liable to it might avoid it by a change
of occupation. (at p295)

6. To amount to civil conscription it is not necessary that the service be a full-time service, or
be rendered as a member of a corps created for the purpose. (at p295)

7. I think then that s. 7A is invalid as being contrary to s. 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Commonwealth
Constitution; but it is severable. (at p295)

8. As to the remaining questions I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice and have
nothing to add. (at p295)

9. I would overrule the demurrer. (at p295)

**ORDER**

Demurrer overruled.


-----

