I am against the Communications Legislation Amendment 2023.

In history censorship has been used to sway public opinion and give undue power to governments
(Germany WW2) Books were burnt that went against the propaganda of the Government. And the
use of this Amendment could be akin to book burning to silence any dissenting view.

The legislation exempts governments State and Federal from being included. Governments lie and
cheat, The American Government attacked one of their own ships in the Gulf of Tonkin and blamed
the Vietnamese to start a 10-year war that Australia joined in with. When protesters marched against
this unjust war, they were belittled by the media and Government as hippies and draft dodgers. The
protesters were right and slowly the population realised that they were misled. But not before
thousands died.

The following examples could also be hiden through the excesive power of this Legislation
Amendment.

Julian Assange has been locked up and facing extradition to the U.S. for telling the truth about U.S.
Government war crimes.

Weapons of mass-destruction that were not found because they were never in Iraq but was used as
an excuse to invade another country and Australia joins in again.

Whistle blower is charged for telling truth about Australian government agency spying to cheat an
impoverished nation out of Resorces. (East Timor)

John Howard enacts 90-year suppression order to hide from the public names of 28 high ranked
people including a former Prime minister and Judge for alleged paedophile activity.

It is inaproprate and undemocratic for Governments to have the power to control and manipulate
free speech. I believe that censorship should not be further increased. Dissenting voices need to be
heard. There are sufficient laws already in place to deal with lies and slander.

George Orwell wrote the famous novel 1984 in which a totalitarian government determines what
“facts” are allowed to be believed via its Ministry of Truth.

I am apposed to the Communications Legislation Amendment 2023.


-----

