# Comments regarding draft of Bill 2023                        
 Damned if you do - damned if you don't.

## The hope of implementing this proposed draft, Bill 2023, seemed to be that public opinions can be sorted into facts and lies. Facts are further regarded as stabilising our nation and to be protected while lies create mob mentalities,harm and chaos, needing to be censored. In this black and white scenario, combined with a top down perspective, the side effects of free speech are a dangerous nuisance. Especially if combined with the speed and scope of the internet. Historically the influence of, for instant, Facebook has indirectly murdered people. But is a censorship by a government agency, implementing penalties the answer? Can the value of creative discussion survive a new dogma, created to safeguard a status quo in a time where new solutions are essential for the planet and the human race? The core of our democracy is to choose a voice that represents the people, not to censor and sue all other voices out of the picture. I have observed that in a public environment ruled by big cooperation who have the money and power to buy the narrative of what is true and what is not any well intended rule can easily be corrupted. ACME will be thrown between conflicting truth, censuring away media's profits. But isn't it media who decides what truth is? Or a scientist in fashion? Or the church or the president? What if, whatever the verdict, harm is inflicted? Or misinformation could ease a harm? I think there is more to loose than to gain with this Bill 2023. Please ponder, what are hopes and visions and personal perceptions – no facts here, what is religion, moral and myth – dangerous misinformation? Leave all this to a paid office worker under time pressure - to stand up for the discuss-ability of sensitive topics? Finally someone to decide if God is a bigger misinformation than aliens according to some industry standard. Or could it be a better policy to tag post according to certain standardised categories and leave it to the public to self censor, learning in the process discernment and responsibility? Are we labelling Australia a democracy while distrusting the citizen to make informed decisions, navigate information or vote for that matter?

 Thank you for your consideration, Monika


-----

