# Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and
 Disinformation) Bill 2023

 I am writing as a citizen of  Australia in regards to the request for
 community input on the proposed Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill 2023. I wish to express my opposition to this Amendment in its entirety. I reject any attempt to decide or define for myself or any other member of this community, what is true or false, what content is worth looking at or listening to, or what content is available to view. Digital platforms have become the modern day equivalent of the “Town Square’ where information, ideas and opinions are expressed freely and those who choose to watch or listen are free to make up their own minds as to what they believe is the truth. This is not and should never be the domain of legislature or government bodies. At best it is belittling and demeaning to take away an individual’s right to come to their own conclusions and at worst this is a dystopian Ministry of Truth style scenario.

 ACMA should not be granted any further powers under the amendments, especially not the carte blanche powers described in Part 1 – Introduction (p. 3-4) “where there is no registered misinformation code, a registered misinformation code is deficient or there are exceptional and urgent circumstances the ACMA may determine a standard to provide adequate protection to the community…”. As a member of the community this bill purports to protect let me emphatically state that I DO NOT WANT YOUR PROTECTION ACMA!

 Defining Misinformation and Disinformation – Sub-Clause 7(2) attempts to define these terms as “content that is false, misleading or deceptive”. The problem here is obvious as we all witnessed over the past 3yrs. Indeed, if these past 3 years are viewed as a test run, it failed abysmally. Information that was flagged as false or misleading turned out to be scientifically true and accurate in the majority of cases. Attempting to bring this type of censorship under legislature leaves the system open to misuse and corruption, as well as having the unfortunate effect of destroying public confidence in leadership. Better to leave it to the town square to decide for themselves what they want to access.


-----

