# New ACMA powers to combat misinformation and disinformation

In my opinion this is a very dangerous piece of legislation.

The draft has been written in response to a report from 2021 at the height of the
Covid-19 pandemic. This report states - Despite platforms’ mostly global approach to
updating policies and implementing other actions, many measures have had an
impact on Australian users.

- In 2020, Facebook removed more than 110,000 pieces of COVID-related
misinformation generated by Australian accounts.

- Between July and December 2020, Twitter removed 50 pieces of content authored
by Australian accounts for contravening its COVID-19 misleading information policy.

- In 2020, Google blocked 101 million advertisements globally for contravening its
misrepresentation policies. > TikTok’s COVID-19 Information Hub was visited by
over 292,000 Australians between November 2020 and March 2021.

It would be interesting to know, just how many of the deleted COVID related posts
are, by 2023 standards, now misinformation or actually correct.

So much of what the Governments, both Federal & State, told us during the
pandemic, would now be classed as mis or disinformation. It is widely accepted that
the so called ‘vaccines’ have caused so much harm and death. And although the
Governments can claim to have been acting with the best intentions, to actually
coerce millions of people into having these injections or lose their jobs, is something
that should NEVER happen again. It was a huge abuse of power.

It is important to have a healthy, functioning democracy and to do so, requires
freedom of speech, to allow proper debate and not just silence those ideas that do
not align with the Government of the day.

It is also a concern on how ‘Hate Speech’ will be viewed. Personally, I do not believe
anyone born a man should be allowed to compete in women’s sports or allowed in
female only spaces. I do not hate Trans people, they can live their lives how they
wish BUT, their belief of their gender should not trump the safety of females. It may
only be a small minority of the Trans community that would pose this risk, but it is a
risk that should not be allowed. And for me and others to state this is NOT hate
speech.


-----

