# I believe that this Bill is yet another overreach by our government. This Bill seems like an extension of the incredible overreach that played out during the pandemic. We were told that these repressive laws were supposed to keep Australians safe.The same reasoning is now being put forward to justify these proposed laws. Do you, the Australian government, plan to ditch our fundamental freedoms of speech and communication as outlined in the UN Declaration of Human Rights? We saw during the pandemic what happened when power was placed in the hands of unelected bureaucrats; it was a disaster. So many lives were destroyed. Now you are asking us, the people of Australia, to allow unelected bureaucrats to determine what is misinformation. We now know that much of what was determined by bureaucrats to be misinformation during the pandemic, was in fact true. This Bill is simply a way to silence anyone who goes against the government narrative. Sounds like Communism to me. How will ACMA be held accountable for its decisions? The Bill mentions some provisions, but they aren’t stringent enough to guarantee our fundamental right of freedom of expression. The plan to impose extreme fines on Social Media outlets for non compliance is just another example of bullying tactics to ensure that the masses are silenced. Over the last three years I have formed a picture in my mind of where we, the citizens of Australia, are headed. I see us like dumb sheep being slowly herded into a paddock by our bureaucratic overlords. One day the gate will be locked behind us and we will find that our freedoms are lost forever.

Sent from my iPhone


-----

