## Attachments: image0.jpeg   ;image1.jpeg   ;image2.jpeg   ;image3.jpeg   ;image4.jpeg   ;image5.jpeg   ;image6.png   ;image7.png   ;image8.png   ;image9.jpeg   ;image10.jpeg   ;image11.jpeg   ;image12.jpeg   ;image13.jpeg   ;image14.png   ;image15.jpeg   ;image16.jpeg   ;Video.mov   ;image17.jpeg   ;image18.jpeg   ;image19.jpeg   ;image20.jpeg   ;image21.png   ;image22.png   ;image23.png   ;image24.jpeg   ;ATT00001.txt   ;
# ___________________________________

Hello Corporation of Australia,
Stop with these 1984 orwellian mind control and for es vaccine agenda. Think ya cousins Are dumb ? I am a.k.a Ben
William De worsley, changing my name back to my grandfathers fathers name. I am Sir Edward John Buntings first
cousin. You freemason mind Police wizards and corrupt families Will continue to be called out and punished for
crimes against humanity. Parasites you jesuits crime families. Like Julian assange being kept by Duke of Kent who
married my cousin Catherine De worsley and king Charles 3rd is my 8th cousin. Stop with ya globalist games ansd
bring on more mind wars and civil unrest with protest. Fight dirty you freemasons military and Police with hidden
tech and Chemtrail The sky. Disgrace to humanity and our bloodlines you conformists to misery and no free speech
In lucifiers worlds a joke. No more Comedy and speaking. Mind Police 1984 bullshit I was born on. Your a disgarce
albo and Liberals and labor. Parasites to homosapiens. Disgarce to kill off Shane warne with vaccine and me
grandmother. And Other cousins you maniacs and luciferian scumbags. Go to hell with this bill and screw up ya bio
harzard Bills for lock downs and wasnt like hellywoods “outbreak” lying pricks z like morge truck 60 bodies ready
at port Arthur and putting cousin Bryant Martin on ancestry dot com In prison with 50% IQ and close case with
wicked witch Queen cannibalism Elizabeth my 7th cousin on ancestry. Parasites and need De working tablets and
disgrace what you do to Barbara oneil Nature path . Santos bonacci and Max igan and Julian assange wili leaks. 666
Will lose you jokes.

Old guard families of jesus Christ our first cousin Will win. Over ya evil vaccines and Now mind control. Get
stuffed Not having it. I know many families australia wide and bring it on. Watch The order outta chaos you free
Masonic pricks ideas.

Love and Show us respect

Ben William De worlsey a.k.a Ben William pavey a.k.a Bennybigballs, un organised plumber. Ready to organise
like The unions. Bring it on ya house of Cards and check mate tooth pricks.

Not soul sellers and old ancient knights templar bloodlines Will unite ASIO Mark my Words. Ya bald headed prick
whos cheif. Suck me organic eggs $1 each


-----

## image0.jpeg


-----

-----

## image1.jpeg


-----

-----

## image2.jpeg


-----

-----

## image3.jpeg


-----

-----

## image4.jpeg


-----

-----

## image5.jpeg


-----

-----

## image6.png


-----

-----

## image7.png


-----

-----

## image8.png


-----

-----

## image9.jpeg


-----

-----

## image10.jpeg


-----

-----

## image11.jpeg


-----

-----

## image12.jpeg


-----

-----

## image13.jpeg


-----

-----

## image14.png


-----

-----

## image15.jpeg


-----

-----

## image16.jpeg


-----

-----

## image17.jpeg


-----

-----

## image18.jpeg


-----

-----

## image19.jpeg


-----

-----

## image20.jpeg


-----

-----

## image21.png


-----

-----

## image22.png


-----

-----

## image23.png


-----

-----

## image24.jpeg


-----

-----

## ATT00001.txt


-----

### Ben W Pavey 


-----

