# From early 2020 to late 2022, what was censored as misinformation has been revealed to be the truth. The Fault Lines, independent review chaired by Peter Shergold that made headlines in October last year and the recent report by Sharri Markson that made headlines in July of this year have given witnesses to what we already knew. What was initially maligned without proper scrutiny has turned out to be relevant and truthful.

 The proposed bill has elements that seek to censor and suppress. This is short sighted and has within it, the danger of becoming ultimately irresponsible. And similar to the censorship of last three years, would have the capacity to cause far more pain for the Australian citizenry than any actual good. Qualified people were silenced, and it’s only in the last year that the vital information they had is being verified as true. Only one narrative was presented to the public, a narrative that has proven to be damaging, then, now, and ultimately in the long run. Vital information and solutions beneficial to the public was censored. For example; now as a result our country is trillions of dollars in debt, our education system is failing and people are still picking up the pieces of their lives. The single minded, dogmatic approach would have done far better to listen to opposing views rather than forge ahead without listening to criticism. This proposed bill will be seen as more overreach and only diminish the public’s already bruised and battered trust even more. A truly robust system should have the strength to back up it’s claims without censoring opposition.


-----

