# Proposed ACMA legislation


## 1-Human-caused climate change is a scam. Though the government is doing its best to change the weather via geoengineering, this is no longer a secret. Look it up.

 2-The Voice to Parliament is a land and power grab that will benefit corporate interests but won’t help Original Australians in any way. In fact, it will make all Australians more powerless than we already are. Race-based legislation is never a good idea.

 3-Vaccines do not improve human or animal health, and they never have. In fact, without vaccines and the vast majority of drugs - including antibiotics - human and animal health would be vastly improved, and life expectancy would be far higher.

 4-The government is not our friend. Anarchy would be preferable to the totalitarian dictatorship we currently live under. We can pick up our garbage and build roads more cheaply and efficiently than any government does. I will take my chances with self- government over the present tyranny any day. And they are exempt from the restrictions to be imposed under these laws.

 5-The vast majority of the legacy media are liars and charlatans who will say anything for a dollar. They are not to be trusted. The proof of this (if you need proof) is that the proposed legislation also exempts those in the ‘approved’ media from compliance with the new codes. Hello, Pravda!

 6-The education systems worldwide need to be destroyed. They are ruining our children and grandchildren forever and cannot be salvaged. They are indoctrination systems and should not exist.


-----

## 7-The entire medical system is also completely broken and beyond repair. Every hospital, every doctor, nurse, and allied health professional who works in those systems without questioning what they are doing needs to be closed down (in the case of hospitals) and sent for retraining (the health professionals), starting with the basics of what actually determines health and why it is never, ever, EVER found in a needle, a poison, a burn or a cut.

# I could go on, but you get my point. If you disagree with anything I said above, that’s great, and indeed, that’s the point. We should be able to agree, disagree, fight with our words, and use our own minds to determine what we feel is right and what isn’t. This legislation will remove ALL those rights. It will stifle, suppress and oppress us to the point where life won’t be worth living for many. Perhaps that’s the goal? We have to stop it - there is no alternative. Whatever it takes, whatever the cost - we must take back our country and our world from the democidal maniacs who currently think they are in charge. Let’s show them who the REAL power is!


-----

