```
I write as priviate individual concerned about the Communications Legislation
Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill 2023. There are
several aspects to my concern.
Firstly, when governments are involved in the regulation of speech, it both
consciously and unconsciously does so in a way that benefits itself and its
allies. There has been a continual march by governments of all stripes to
erode the freedoms of the people they serve. This legislation will likely
have far-reaching unforeseen consequences for political speech.
My general view is that a good law is one that applies equally to all in
society. This is where my second concern lies. This draft legislation is
written in a way that will clearly benefit some at the cost of others. It is
stated that 'the code and standard-making powers will not apply to authorised
electoral and referendum content and other types of content such as
professional news and satire'. Our history is replete with the established
political parties making knowingly false statements but these proposed laws
will not apply to them. As to 'professional news', it is not clear what
exactly that is. Again, there are an uncountable number of examples where
licensed broadcast and print media institutions have pushed an agenda that
either serves its interests or those that they support. It seems unfair that
such organisations may publish misinformation on digital platforms whilst
others may not. It is not clear as to what gives them special privelege.
Especially as our nation’s media is one of the most concentrated in the
western world, with a powerful duopoly of Nine Entertainment and Murdoch’s
News Corp controlling most of the Australian press.
Coupled with that, the overall regulation is structured in such a way that
will be a clear benefit to the established platforms and will have the effect
of detering smaller players and new entrants. It appears that there willl be
a significant administrative burden to comply. In addition, as the draft
legislation proposes imposing hefty fines on social media companies who fail
to adequately block “misinformation” and “disinformation” from circulation in
Australia, the likely result will be that it will be simpler and easier to
simply not publish information to the Australian public rather than face
punitive penalties.
Finally, the problem with laws against inaccurate information is of course
that somebody needs to be making the determination what information is true
and what is false, and those determinations will necessarily be informed by
the biases and agendas of the person or body making them. There are many
instances where something at one time is labled 'misinformation', but later
found to be true or vice versa. In fact there are many instances where a
position on a number of subjects may be substantiated using an abundance of
facts and evidence, but for which there’s still a sizeable portion of the
population which would consider such claims malignant disinformation with or
without the supporting data. 
It is one thing to enact legislation that is reportedly needed because there
is a desire to protect such things as public health, the marginalized, fight
foreign influence, or curb unsavory opinions, but this legislation appears to
be a push to control speech because of a desire to control speech.
Governments and the powerful understand that narrative control is real power. 
In a democratic society there needs to be an egalitarian application of the
rights and responsibilities of the people.

```

-----

