# Federation of Ethnic Communities’ Councils  of Australia

## Submission into the Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill 2023
 20 August 2023

_FECCA pays its respects to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elders past and present and recognise the land we live_
_and work upon was never ceded. FECCA proudly supports the Uluru Statement from the Heart and its call for the_
_establishment of a First Nations Voice protected by the Constitution._

_FECCA acknowledges that our work on behalf of multicultural Australia has learnt from and been enriched by First_
_Nations peoples and organisations. We are committed to continuing to listen, learn and support First Nations_
_peoples in the journey to a more inclusive society._


1


1


-----

### Foreword
The Federation of Ethnic Communities’ Councils of Australia (FECCA) welcomes the Communications
Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill, which proposes a new
framework for the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) to hold digital platforms
accountable for sharing harmful misinformation and disinformation. Many multicultural communities
are highly impacted by the dissemination of mis and disinformation across emerging digital platforms,
and it is important for consideration to be given to their experiences and insights into the design of the
legislation and reforms.

We commend the new powers for the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA)
[proposed in the Bill for being in accordance with recommendations from the National Anti-Racism](https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/race-discrimination/publications/national-anti-racism-framework-scoping-report)
_[Framework Scoping Report 2022, which calls for better regulation of media, especially social media, to](https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/race-discrimination/publications/national-anti-racism-framework-scoping-report)_
prevent experiences of racism. The regulation of discriminatory, misleading, and harmful information on
digital services platform is undeniably necessary.

[For enquiries, please contact FECCA CEO Mohammad Al-Khafaji at ceo@fecca.org.au or](mailto:ceo@fecca.org.au)
on (02) 6282 5755.

### Who we are
FECCA is the national peak body representing people from multicultural communities and their
organisations across Australia. Through the membership of state, territory, and regional councils, we
represent over 1,500 community organisations and their members.

### What we do
For over 40 years, FECCA has proudly worked alongside culturally and linguistically diverse communities,
the broader Australian society and the Commonwealth government to build a successful,
productive and inclusive multicultural Australia where everyone, no matter their background or how
long they have lived in this country, can belong equally and reach their full potential.

FECCA draws on the lived experiences of the people and their descendants that have migrated to
Australia and the expertise of its extensive and diverse membership to develop and promote inclusive,
innovative and responsible public policy that reflects the needs and perspectives of
multicultural Australia. We are dedicated to building a strong, innovative and inclusive multicultural
nation that harnesses its greatest strength, the diversity of its people.

The FECCA network is FECCA’s greatest strength. Through our network we can enhance the capacity
of governments to strengthen public policy to meet the needs of the diverse Australian population.
FECCA is a proven trusted partner to both communities and government, operating as a sophisticated
conduit between communities and government and mobilising communities to work with government
to develop and enrich public policy through community-led expertise and action.

2


-----

### Supporting a strong and inclusive nation
Australia is a truly multicultural nation and the proportion of the population who were born overseas
has been steadily increasing since 2006. In 2021, over half (51.5 per cent) of the population was either
born overseas or had at least one parent who was. Additionally, 23 per cent of Australians spoke a
language other than English at home[1]. With the wide range of ethnic, linguistic, cultural, and religious
identities represented in our society, we must strive to uphold social trust, cooperation, and
togetherness. A fundamental requirement for a strong, harmonious and inclusive society is the ability
for all members of society, regardless of language or cultural background, to be able to access relevant,
safe and trustworthy information and content, and to be protected from harassment and intimidation
when doing so[2].

It is important to recognise that multicultural communities are not homogenous. People from
multicultural backgrounds are often grouped together as culturally and linguistically diverse and treated
as homogenous in government policies and services, which overlooks the myriad differences between
communities, such as culture and language. This often results in services and messages that do not
connect with the intended audience as they are not nuanced to specific differences. Some multicultural
communities for example, have highly advanced levels of digital literacy and some very low, which
means that information about mis and disinformation to multicultural communities would need to be
nuanced beyond just language accessibility.

The experiences of people from multicultural backgrounds are not only affected by their cultural
identities, but also by other intersecting social and political identity markers such as age, gender, sexual
orientation, impairment, class, religion, and visa status. These identities do not exist independently;
each informs the other and can have overlapping and compounding effects. People’s experiences are
also influenced by other factors – for example, living in a rural or remote area. The intersection of all of
these aspects can see some people from culturally and linguistically diverse people having higher levels
of vulnerability than others.

### The rise of digital service platforms and misinformation 
Patterns of communication and media consumption have significantly changed, and digital platforms
have increasingly taken precedence over traditional forms of media. Many studies indicate that
ethnically, culturally, and linguistically diverse communities predominantly engage with digital service
platforms, such as social media, to stay connected with family and receive information.

While the benefits of digital platforms are vast, there is growing concern about the spread of harmful
misinformation on these platforms. In recent years there has been a surge in targeted mis and
disinformation campaigns against cultural minority groups in Australia[3] and research has shown that
multicultural Australians are more likely than the rest of the population to say that recognising and
preventing misinformation is important to them[4].

The expansion of engagement in digital platforms has seen existing inequalities within the broader
community reproduced in digital spaces, particularly the negative stereotyping experienced by
marginalised communities. Culturally diverse communities have been targeted in disinformation attacks
that have been, at times, antireligious, anti-immigrant, xenophobic, misogynist, ideologically extreme,
deliberately misleading, or conspiratorial. The spread of misinformation and disinformation within and
beyond multicultural and diasporic communities can have disastrous and long-term public health and
safety implications.

3


-----

Many people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds face additional barriers to accessing
clear, reliable and accurate information, particularly newly arrived migrants and refugees. These barriers
can include limited digital literacy and literacy, limited English language skills, and limited social support
and networks to assist in navigating society and systems,

### Recommendations
In consideration of the serious harms people from multicultural communities face from the spread of
misinformation and disinformation on digital services platforms, FECCA makes the following
recommendations:

**Recommendation 1: Include poor and misleading translations in scope of harmful misinformation**
Misinformation is defined in the proposed Bill as “content that is disseminated on a digital service where
the content is false, misleading, or deceptive, and where the provision of that content on the service is
reasonably likely to cause or contribute to serious harm”. Poor and misleading translations should be
considered as a form of misinformation which has the potential to cause or contribute to serious harm.

Multicultural Australians have varying levels of English proficiency, and some community members will
rely on translations to engage with digital services platforms. This means that their understanding of
information presented on these platforms depends upon the quality of translation. Poorly translated
information can cause important health and safety messages to be misunderstood or missed, putting
entire communities at risk of harm. Furthermore, misinformation through poor translations can
contribute to growing mistrust of organisations and digital platforms, thereby reducing the effectiveness
of future important health and safety messaging, particularly in emergency situations.

The serious harm caused by poor translations creating misinformation was evident during the COVID-19
pandemic. Many translations of important public health messages were not natural or fluent, and
sometimes did not make sense in the target language[5]. This form of misinformation contributed to
disproportionately negative outcomes for multicultural Australians throughout the pandemic, including
higher rates of virus transmission and virus-related death, which also led to increased experiences of
racial hatred, discrimination and harassment[6].

**Recommendation 2: Coordinate ACMA regulation with the National Anti-Racism Framework**
Under the new powers proposed by the Bill, the Australian Communications and Media Authority’s
(ACMA) consideration of misinformation that causes harm on the basis of ethnicity, nationality, and race
should align itself with the National Anti-Racism Framework. The Bill currently considers harm that
includes “hatred against a group in Australian society on the basis of ethnicity, nationality, race, gender,
sexual orientation, age, religion, or physical or mental disability.”

In 2021, Australia’s Race Discrimination Commissioner proposed the development of a National AntiRacism Framework to provide a long-term, central reference point for anti-racist standards. The
Australian Human Rights Commission is developing the Framework through extensive consultation with
communities and organisations and is well placed to determine a national approach to defining,
identifying and addressing racism and discrimination. This regulation will be enhanced by closely aligning
with a systematic, overarching, and structured framework such as the National Anti-Racism Framework.

4


-----

**Recommendation 3: Intersectionality should be a key consideration in policy and practice**
The discrimination and disadvantage a multicultural person or community faces is affected not only by
their cultural and ethnic identities and their language, but also by the intersection of other identity
markers such as, for example, age, gender, sexual orientation, impairment, class and religion. This
understanding needs to be embedded into the way in which serious harm arising from mis and
disinformation is defined, identified, experienced and addressed.

**Recommendation 4: Fund culturally informed and in-language education on mis and disinformation**
Language barriers faced by multicultural Australians may impact their ability to fully engage with and
understand the definition of mis and disinformation, what constitutes serious harm, and what the new
measures proposed by the Bill mean for them as digital platform users. As prominent users of digital
services platforms, multicultural Australians will be impacted by changes brought forward under the Bill.
It is therefore crucial that measures to combat mis and disinformation are communicated in a culturally
appropriate and accessible way to ensure that all Australians, regardless of language and cultural
background, have an equal opportunity to be well-informed, engaged and protected. This is not only
important as a measure of inclusion for multicultural Australians but can also lead to more digital service
platform users identifying, reporting and mitigating misinformation and disinformation.

[1 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2021), Census of Population and Housing](https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/detailed-methodology-information/concepts-sources-methods/labour-statistics-concepts-sources-and-methods/2021/methods-four-pillars-labour-statistics/household-surveys/census-population-and-housing)

2 Tran, M. (2020, October 29). Australian news outlets fail migrant communities. Here’s what needs to happen.
_[Arts Hub. https://www.artshub.com.au/news/opinions-analysis/australian-news-outlets-fail-migrant-communities-](https://www.artshub.com.au/news/opinions-analysis/australian-news-outlets-fail-migrant-communities-heres-what-needs-to-happen-261338-2368918/)_
[heres-what-needs-to-happen-261338-2368918/](https://www.artshub.com.au/news/opinions-analysis/australian-news-outlets-fail-migrant-communities-heres-what-needs-to-happen-261338-2368918/)

3 Mamalipurath, J.M. (2023). Examining the Problem of Misinformation among the Indian Diaspora in Australia –
[Report, Western Sydney University. Australia. https://doi.org/10.26183/a6z9-dp19](https://doi.org/10.26183/a6z9-dp19)

4 Notley, T., Chambers, S., Park, S., Dezuanni, M. 2021, Adult Media Literacy in Australia: Attitudes, Experiences and
_Needs. Western Sydney University, Queensland University of Technology and University of Canberra_

5 Hajek, J., Karidakis, M., Amorati, R., Sengupta, M., Hao, Y., Pym, A. & Woodward-Kron, R. (2022). Understanding
the experiences and communication needs of culturally and linguistically diverse communities during the COVID-19
pandemic.

6 Akolawa, N. (2022, February 18). Effects of the pandemic on multicultural migrants in Australia. Nisreen Akowala.
[https://nisreenakolawala.com/2022/02/18/effects-of-the-pandemic-on-the-multicultural-australians/](https://nisreenakolawala.com/2022/02/18/effects-of-the-pandemic-on-the-multicultural-australians/)

5


-----

