**Re: Feedback on an exposure draft of the Communications Legislation Amendment**
**(Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation) Bill 2023**

“Only a government that is afraid of its citizens tries to control them.” Thomas Jefferson

As the majority of Australians become evermore distracted by the Matilda’s onfield
performances, conveniently in the background, lays a sinister piece of legislation

[Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting Misinformation and Disinformation)
Bill 2023] drafted by ‘our’ government attempting to remove the Voice of every single
Australian. How supremely ironical of ‘our’ government considering its claims that
Indigenous Australians need a special Voice in order to be heard.

Welcome to the Albanese Government’s Orwellian Ministry of Truth 2023.

As any learned student of history will tell you, the greatest atrocities that have ever occurred
to humankind were directly due to government overreach. This proposed bill is exactly that,
government overreach, and MUST be immediately torn up and thrown out!

As the debate turns to the possible ramifications for ALL Australians, if this sinister piece of
legislation were to become ‘law’, it is critical not to forget the official explanation given by
the Albanese Government as to the purpose of this bill…to protect “the safety and wellbeing
of Australians”.
Let that register, to protect “the safety and wellbeing of Australians”.
There it is again, the catchphrase “for your safety”, that the government turns to in order to
get people to go along with what it wants, instead of what We [the people] want. How lucky
are We that ‘our’ government cares more about us, than We care about ourselves!

So, for those of us that are still capable of thinking and understand the power that We all have
been granted, MUST call this out for what it is, a blatant attempt to manipulate and control
the political narrative.
We are told that ACMA (Australian Communications and Media Authority) will hold the
power to determine what the truth is. Because you know it has been determined by ‘our’
government that in the interest of public safety the era of public debate has ended. Jeez I
wonder what could potentially go wrong…anyone with a working brain cell will be able to
work out that ACMA is comprised of fallible human beings. But, not to worry, ‘our’
government has already factored this in and will eliminate any likelihood of errors being
made by empowering faceless bureaucrats to act like God.

Finally, the warning sign that cannot be missed. The government and certain bodies/entities
will be exempt from its own legislation. If that does not say it all, then I do not know what
does!

In conclusion, this is nothing more than a war against free speech. It is My Will that this
proposed bill be immediately torn up and thrown out! It is blatantly evident that this is a
totalitarian, draconian and most dangerous piece of legislation directly threatening the
individual rights and freedoms of ALL Australians. We the People have a moral duty to do
everything in our power to make sure that this proposed bill does not come into existence.


-----

