I am **against** and do not approve of the new ACMA powers to combat misinformation

and disinformation

Misinformation and disinformation pose a threat to the safety and well being of Australians, as wellas to our

democracy, society, and economy,


What a load of rubbish, these words (pose a threat to the safety and well being of Australians) are Just that

disinformation.

Every night from 6pm we have a show called the project this is a show that I refuse to watch as I do
not agree with nor do I like the way they present their version of "the News" I have often said they
should change the name of this show to The Opinion.

That said I have never asked for it to be taken of air or have a warning prior to it airing I simply
choose to not watch.

Some friends of mine take everything they say as fact, we may have a discussion on something they
have seen and we either agree on the facts of a subject or not either way we move on.

My In-laws are Jehovah Witness I'm not; I don’t tell them they are wrong because they pray before a
meal I simply sit quite for a minute and let them do their thing.

I quite often see on socials Fact Checked this comment has been taken out on contexts, hey hang on
isn’t this what the news channels and political opponents do on a regular basis take things out of
context to give their version of the facts to twist a narrative.

Are we going to have a fact check sticker on every billboard next election I think not.


Were I’m going with this is everyone has an opinion and everyone reads into things a certain way hellI

believe half the laws in this country are open to interpretation am I wrong maybe but it’s my opinion.


John Howard was the best prime minister ever, Biden did not win the


election,


The earth is


flat,


Oil is


not a fossil fuel it’s a byproduct of our home, Global warming or is it climate change is load of

rubbish, Labor will destroy this country, agenda 2030 is coming.

Are these facts or just my views, I have the right to express them, you have the right to believe me or
not, you also have the right to say I think you read that wrong or that has merit, but I need to
investigate this before expressing my opinion on it.

The moment you have someone in the background in charge of what everyone views is the moment
we have all lost. its called communism


-----

